Classification of RNA Splice Junctions 
Based on Genomic Signals

Mavis Li
Yun (Sammy) Long
John Mu

Abstract
Classification of splice junctions is a critical component in the identification of new RNA isoforms in genetic 
annotations. Current high-throughput experimental techniques are unable to reliably identify splice junctions 
with high confidence. We propose to use a support vector machine (SVM) based model to improve the 
specificity of such experiments. Compared to existing schemes, our model performs competitively despite its 
simplicity. Various parameters such as the length of the sequence feature vector and the distance between 
nucleotides were tuned to optimal values. Overall, it was shown that the SVM is a capable tool for identification 
of splice junctions based on their contextual genomic signals.

1 Introduction
Proteins are an important class of molecules in living organisms and are a part of almost all biochemical 
processes. A central part in the production of proteins within a cell is the formation of messenger ribonucleic 
acid (mRNA) from the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequence. Formation and regulation of mRNA is not a well 
understood process. Hence, we aim to apply machine learning techniques to model the splicing step of the 
process. A brief overview of splicing and why it is possible to model is given below. 

In the formation of a protein, DNA first transcribes to pre-mRNA, which is essentially the same sequence as the 
original DNA segment. Next, a number of post-processing steps are applied to the pre-mRNA by various 
enzymes and complexes to form the final mRNA. The mRNA is then transported to the cytoplasm and 
translated to a protein. One of the most important steps in the post-processing is known as RNA splicing. In 
this step, large parts of the pre-mRNA are removed by a specialized complex called the spliceosome. These 
removed segments are known as introns and the remaining segments are called exons. Only exons can 
potentially code for a protein as they are not removed. The location of the removal is known as a splice 
junction. A splice junction in mammals usually begins with GT and ends with AG. For practical reasons, we only  
consider splice sites with this highly conserved GT-AG sequence. 

Figure 1 - Splice junction illustration

 

In this project, the contextual DNA sequence around each splice junction (apart from the GT-AG) is used to 
learn whether a given splice junction is real or not. We initially considered many of algorithms presented in 
class. However, we eventually settled on an SVM due to it’s simple implementation and high classification 
accuracy. Section 2 will discuss why the identification of splice junctions is an important and interesting 
problem. 

There is a long history of splice junction identification models. A prominent one is GENSCAN (Burge and 
Karlin,1997), which used a Maximal Dependence Decomposition (MDD) model to build a tree of the most 
Page  1
 

informative features. Yeo (Yeo, 2004) generalized this to a maximum entropy model. Later there were several 
attempts to use SVMs (Baten, 2006, 2008) and neural networks (Wang, 2006) to classify splice sites. Currently  
we are comparing our model with Yeo’s model as that is the most popular model. 

2 Motivation
A key aspect in the splicing process is that introns are much longer than exons (average 25k vs 100 
nucleotides). Hence, the spliceosome must be able to recognise the precise junction locations from a 
comparatively long sequence. The precise location is important as a single base shift would change the entire 
protein structure. This suggests that there is a strong genomic signal near the splice junctions (apart from the 
GT-AG) that defines its location. The genomic signal is also confirmed by much experimental and biological 
evidence.

Traditionally, the detection of splice junctions from DNA sequence was used as a part of gene finding models 
(Burge and Karlin,1997). With the recent advances of high-throughput sequencing, there is great interest in 
high-throughput sequencing of RNA (known as RNA-seq). One issue with the RNA-seq protocol is that the 
reads generated are fairly short and frequently cannot be aligned reliably to the genome as a split read. As a 
result, it is hard to reliably call junctions by simply aligning RNA-seq reads to the genome. We would like to use 
machine learning combined with the contextual sequences to improve the reliability of RNA-seq alignments. 

3 Method
RNA-seq reads from a wild type mouse cerebrum are aligned to the genome with SpliceMap (Au,2010). 
Junctions with more than three non-redundant reads are labelled as true junctions (positive examples). This 
has been experimentally shown to be a good criteria in the paper. Negative examples are generated from other  
sequences which contain GT-AG and are near the true junction. These sequences are the most likely to be 
mistaken as a splice site. The eventual goal is to apply this model to the junctions with less than or equal to 
three non-redundant reads in order to improve specificity of the overall alignment. 

Contextual sequences extracted from the 5’(donor) and 3’(acceptor) sites of the splice junctions are used as 
features. For each end, we varied the length from the exon and the intron (with the canonical GT-AG sequence 
excluded) in order to determine the optimal sequence length for identifying splice sites. See Figure 2 below for 
illustration.

Figure 2 - Contextual sequences
In addition to looking at the 5’ and 3’ sequences individually, we also concatenated the 5’ and 3’ sequences that 
correspond to the same splice site. Further, we fixed the exon length at both ends to its optimal value and 
tuned the intron length to optimize the combined sequence length.

Each of the four nucleotides A, C, T and G was represented by real vectors [a 0 0 0], [0 c 0 0], [0 0 t 
0] and [0 0 0 g], respectively. That is, each L-nt training example is converted to a length 4L real vector so 
that it can be directly inputted into a standard SVM package. Assuming equal distances (a = c = t = g = 
1) yields acceptable results. However, it was found that altering the nucleotide vectors slightly improved 
accuracy. 
 
We initially trained an SVM model using the LIBLINEAR library (http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/liblinear/). 
LIBLINEAR implements an SVM with a linear kernel, which allows for fast training on large data sets. We set 
LIBLINEAR to solve support vector classification with L1-regularized logistic regression. We further trained an 
SVM model with a Gaussian kernel by using the LIBSVM library (http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm/). The 
 
Page  2

training time of the Gaussian kernel on 200k examples takes about 10 minutes, compared to 30 seconds on 
the linear kernel. 

In order to assess significance of appending paired donor and acceptor sites, we compared the ROC curve 
generated from training with appended sequences from the same splice sites versus random permuted 
pairings of 5’ (donor) and 3’ (acceptor) sequences. 

4 Results
Using data from Gene Yeo’s paper (Yeo, 2004), we compared our algorithm to a linear SVM and their model. 
Our algorithm appears to perform very similarly to their maximum entropy model (MEM) algorithm with the 5-
prime data and is competitive with the 3-prime data (Figure 3). 

Figure 3 - Comparison between alternative models

The rest of our results used the RNA-Seq data from the previously mentioned wild type mouse cerebrum. 
Simple cross validation with 70% training and 30% test is used to evaluate the model’s performance. 

 

Figure 4 - Pairing of donor and acceptor sites

In Figure 4, we see that appending sequences from the donor and acceptor of the same splice site tells us 
slightly more information than if the two sites were randomly paired.

 

Page  3

95

90

85

80

75

70

y
c
a
r
u
c
c
a

65

 
0

5

Five Prime

 

y
c
a
r
u
c
c
a

 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 7
10
16
18
20
25

15
10
exon length

20

25

88
86

84
82

80

78
76

74
72

70

68

Three Prime

 

 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 7
10
16
18
20
25
30

 
0

5

15
10
exon length

20

25

Figure 5 - 5’ and 3’ feature length versus accuracy

Based on our results learning from 5’ and 3’ separately (Figure 5), we concluded that including 5 bp from the 5’ 
exon and 3 bp from the 3’ exon should provide adequate information. In Figure 6, we concatenated the 5’ and 
3’ sites. The 5’ intron was set to a fixed length, as the length of the 3’ intron was varied. As shown in Figure 6, 
accuracy increased as the length of the 3’ intron increased. However, little improvement was observed after 
including 15 bp from the 3’ intron. The different curves in figure 5 corresponds to a different length of the 5’ 
intron. We also observed increased accuracy with increases in the length of the 5’ intron. An acceptable 
outcome was observed after inclusion of 10 bp from the 5’ intron. 

 

Figure 6 - Concatenated sequence accuracy

The distance between nucleotides is not expected to be symmetric since G-C bonds are slightly stronger than 
A-T bonds. However, it is not clear how this would should relate to the nucleotide vectors. Hence, we 
systematically tried some combinations nucleotide vectors, shown in Figure 7. The alternative nucleotide 
vectors provide better classification performance. 

 

Page  4

Figure 7 - Distance between nucleotides

5 Conclusion
Overall, an SVM model was implemented for classification of splice junctions. It has been shown to perform 
competitively compared to current models. The pairing of 3’ and 5’ sites was shown to provide additional 
information for classification. The optimal feature length for classification was examined. Finally, a non-uniform 
distance between nucleotides was demonstrated to improve classification accuracy. This model will be used as  
part of the pipeline to improve specificity of split read alignments. 

6 Acknowledgements
Thanks to Quoc Le for his excellent advice, and Prof. Susan Ackerman’s and Prof. Wing H Wong’s labs for the 
mouse cerebrum RNA-Seq data. Thanks also to Prof. Andrew Ng for his fantastic teaching.

7 Appendix
Data files may be downloaded from: http://www-stat.stanford.edu/~johnmu/mouse/

References
Au, KF, Jiang, H, Lin, L, Xing, Y, and Wong, WH, Detection of splice junctions from paired-end RNA-seq 
data by SpliceMap, Nucleic Acids Research, 2010 doi:10.1093/nar/gkq211

Baten, A, Halgamuge, S.K. and Chang, B.C.H., Fast splice site detection using information content and 
feature reduction, BMC Bioinformatics 9 (Suppl. 12) (2008), p. S8.

Baten A, Chang B, Halgamuge S, Li J: Splice site identification using probabilistic parameters and SVM 
classification. BMC Bioinformatics 2006 , 7(Suppl 5):S15.

Burge and Karlin, 1997 C. Burge and S. Karlin, Prediction of complete gene structures in human genomic 
DNA, J. Mol. Biol. 268 (1997), pp. 78–94. 

Wang M, Marin A. Characterization and prediction of alternative splice sites. Gene 2006; 366: 219–227.

Yeo, G. W. and Burge, C. B. Maximum entropy modeling of short sequence motifs with applications to 
RNA splicing signals. J. Computational Biol., 11, 475–494 (2004).

 

Page  5

