Predicting and Understanding Bronchopulmonary Dysplasia in Premature Infants
Laney Kuenzel, under the mentorship of Suchi Saria and Professor Daphne Koller
CS 229 Final Report
December 10, 2010

I . IN TRODUC T ION
Bronchopulmonary dysplasia (BPD) is a lung disorder that
affects infants, primarily those born prematurely. Deﬁned as
the requirement for oxygen therapy for at least 28 postnatal
days, BPD occurs in nearly a third of infants with birth weight
under 1000 grams [1]. BPD is associated with far-reaching
negative consequences such as further respiratory problems,
cerebral palsy, and cognitive impairment [2].
Unfortunately, BPD is one of the most poorly understood
complications of prematurity. In particular, there is no consen-
sus on the pathogenesis of the disease. Among the commonly
hypothesized causes of BPD are ventilator-induced injury, lung
immaturity, lung inﬂammation due to infection, and genetic
predisposition [2, 3].
Previous work on predicting BPD has focused primarily on
correlating eventual BPD diagnosis with laboratory measure-
ments, medicine administrations, and mechanical ventilator
settings. Such studies have consistently shown BPD to be
signiﬁcantly associated with certain abnormal blood gas levels
(e.g., low blood pH) as well as aggressive ventilation [4–6].
Despite the abundance of studies seeking to identify factors
associated with BPD diagnosis, a large gap still exists in the
body of literature on BPD prediction: very little is known
about what characterizes the physiological signals (such as
heart rate and respiratory rate) of infants eventually diagnosed
with BPD. We believe that this area is under-explored largely
because it has only recently become possible to obtain ﬁne-
grained physiological time series data for hospitalized infants.
We were fortunate enough to have access to this type of
data, enabling us to conduct novel research on the relationship
between physiological signals and BPD. This endeavor was
particularly exciting due to its potential to generate important
new medical knowledge.
In our search for physiological signatures for BPD, we
focused speciﬁcally on three signals: heart rate, respiratory
rate, and oxygen saturation. We had two main reasons for
choosing these particular signals.
First,
it makes sense from a biological perspective that
lung problems would manifest in these three signals. The
lungs serve to introduce oxygen from inhaled air into the
bloodstream and to release carbon dioxide from the blood
as exhaled air. Therefore, we would expect infants with poor
lung function to exhibit low oxygen levels (motivating our
use of the oxygen saturation signal) and high carbon dioxide
levels. Furthermore, in infants with lung problems, we would
expect to observe altered patterns in the breathing rate and
heart rate (motivating our use of the respiratory rate and heart
rate signals) as the body attempts to respond to the blood gas
imbalance by adjusting the amount of air entering and exiting
as well as the speed with which the blood is circulating.

Second, these three signals are recorded noninvasively for
every infant in a neonatal intensive care unit (NICU). Conse-
quently, a predictive model for BPD based only on features
of these three signals could easily be adopted by any NICU.
This is not the case for a model with features that rely on
more invasive, expensive, or nonstandard measurements.
For these reasons, we formulated our overall goal as un-
derstanding whether and how BPD manifests in an infant’s
heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation signals. The
remainder of this paper describes our efforts toward this goal.

I I . DATA
We had access to minute-interval time series data collected
from monitoring devices attached to premature infants during
their entire stay in Stanford Hospital’s NICU. For these infants,
we also had data on all of the clinical events, such as laboratory
tests and ventilator setting changes, that occurred during their
hospitalization.
Of the infants admitted to Stanford’s NICU between March
2008 and March 2009, we considered those satisfying the
following criteria: gestational age ≤ 34 weeks, birth weight
≤ 2000 grams, length of life ≥ 28 days (allowing for BPD
diagnosis), and availability of ≥ 5000 minutes of monitor data.
Of these infants, the thirty with a positive BPD diagnosis
were included in the study. As negative examples, an addi-
tional thirty-seven infants were chosen at random from those
diagnosed with respiratory distress syndrome, an indicator of
breathing problems at the time of birth, but not BPD.
In this set of infants, low gestational age and low birth
weight were found to be highly predictive of BPD, with areas
under the ROC curve (AUCs) of 0.93 and 0.91, respectively.
For this reason, we also created an age/weight-matched set
of twenty infants (ten with BPD and ten controls), for which
gestational age and birth weight had much lower AUCs of
0.62 and 0.59, respectively.

I I I . IN I T IA L EX PLORAT ION O F F EATUR E S
For each infant, we had a very large quantity of data, in-
cluding several long physiological time series and information
on tens of thousands of diverse clinical events. As a ﬁrst step,
we wanted to determine which of the many available pieces of
data would be most useful to us for predicting BPD. We drew
from the BPD literature, our discussions with Stanford NICU
clinicians, and our observations from visualizing the data to
identify 160 potentially interesting features of the ﬁrst 5000
minutes of data available for each infant.
Around forty of these features were functions of the phys-
iological signals, such as mean, range, standard deviation,
and amount of time below or above threshold values. Sixty
more features were related to laboratory measurements (e.g.,
platelet count and blood oxygen level) identiﬁed as predictive

TABLE I
CON SERVAT IV E M EAN AUC S FOR TO P F EATUR E S

Feature
Number of dextrose administrations
Number of ISTAT blood gas measurements
Number of ventilator setting increases
Number of ventilator FiO2 setting increases
Number of ventilator rate setting increases
Number of 10% dextrose administrations
Maximum airway resistance measurement
Mean blood pH measurement
Minimum blood pH measurement
Maximum blood carbon dioxide measurement
Range of blood carbon dioxide measurements
Range of blood pH measurements
Minimum blood oxygen measurement
Median RR range over 5-minute windows
Mean abs. diff. between consecutive RR values

Full Set Match Set
0.82
0.84
0.78
0.84
0.82
0.82
0.79
0.80
0.77
0.77
0.78
0.75
0.74
0.84
0.74
0.82
0.84
0.80
0.84
0.79
0.77
0.78
0.87
0.74
0.77
0.74
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.74

of BPD in previous studies. For each type of measurement, we
included as features the ﬁrst, mean, minimum, and maximum
values, the range of values, and the number of measurements
taken. Given that existing work has shown aggressive ven-
tilation to be correlated with BPD, we also included about
thirty features related to ventilator type and settings. Rounding
out the set of features we considered were the numbers of
administrations of over twenty types of medicine.
To determine the predictive value of each feature, we
computed the conservative mean AUC (with k = 10 folds) as
proposed by Khosla et al. in order to penalize features sensitive
to variations in sampling [7]. The ﬁfteen top-performing
features across both the full set and the age/weight-matched
set are displayed in Table I along with their conservative mean
AUCs. We observed that these top features fell into three
categories:
(i) Six of the features measured the frequency of various
clinical interventions (namely medicine administrations,
blood draws, and ventilator adjustments) ordered by
the NICU doctors. The strong performance of these
intervention frequencies as features suggests that Stan-
ford clinicians have a good sense of which infants are
at highest risk for BPD or other complications and
therefore require the most treatment and surveillance.
(ii) Seven of the features were functions of measurements
other than the physiological signals. More speciﬁcally,
six were related to blood gas values and the other one
was a function of the airway resistance measurement,
which is taken only for infants on a particular type of
ventilator. Interestingly, the frequency of blood draws
was generally more predictive of BPD than the actual
measurement values resulting from those draws. Assum-
ing that the NICU doctors order more blood draws for
the infants that they deem sicker, this result suggests
that the doctors’ assessment of an infant’s health status
is richer in predictive information than the blood gas
levels for that infant.
(iii) The remaining two features were functions of the res-
piratory rate. We were surprised to ﬁnd that of the over

forty physiological features we considered, only these
two were among the ﬁfteen most informative.
As described in Section I, our aim in this project was to
shed light on the relationship between physiological signals
and BPD. We found in this initial exploration that most
of the highly predictive features for BPD were related not
directly to physiology but instead to intervention frequencies
and laboratory measurements. Based on this result, we decided
to focus our further efforts on ﬁnding physiological proxies for
the informative interventions and measurements.

IV. MOT IVAT ION FOR “PROXY ” A P PROACH

Essentially, we decided to examine the relationship be-
tween our three physiological signals and the interventions
and measurements corresponding to the features in categories
(i) and (ii) above. More speciﬁcally, we hoped to identify
physiological signatures characterizing the time when a given
intervention is ordered, in the case of category (i), or the time
when an infant has a certain measurement value, in the case of
category (ii). Our rationale was that because the intervention
frequencies and measurement values were so predictive of
BPD, good physiological proxies for them would likely be
predictive of BPD as well.
In addition to their potential value in BPD prediction,
physiological proxies for the informative features would be
useful in several other ways. In the case of category (i), we
could use physiological signatures for a given intervention
to create a tool reporting whether an infant
is exhibiting
physiology which typically precedes that intervention. Such
a tool would help NICU doctors decide whether and when a
certain intervention is necessary.
Physiological proxies for the blood gas and resistance mea-
surements in category (ii) would be valuable for two reasons
beyond BPD prediction. First, we could incorporate such
proxies into a tool that would let doctors noninvasively obtain
a rough estimate of blood gas levels or resistance for an infant.
This type of tool would reduce the number of invasive blood
draws performed, beneﬁting both the health of the infants and
the hospital’s budget. Second, independent of any prediction
application, an understanding of how abnormal measurements
manifest
in the physiological signals of premature infants
would constitute valuable medical knowledge.
Why did we believe that physiological proxies for our
predictive features would exist at all? In terms of interventions,
Stanford NICU clinicians informed us that they decide what
interventions to order based partly on an infant’s physiological
signals. For example, doctors consider low oxygen saturation
and high respiratory rate as signs that the ventilator is not
working effectively and requires setting increases. In terms of
measurements, we expected that abnormal blood gas values
would be reﬂected in the physiological signals since the body
sets the heart and respiratory rates based on blood levels of
oxygen and carbon dioxide.

V. EX PER IM EN TA L S ETU P

A. Data
In our ﬁrst set of experiments, we considered ﬁve inter-
ventions with predictive frequencies: dextrose administrations,
ISTAT blood gas measurements (note that “ISTAT” refers to a
type of handheld blood gas meter), and increases in three types
of ventilator settings. We examined the 60-minute intervals of
our physiological signals preceding these interventions. The
intervals were taken from the ﬁrst 5000 minutes of monitor
data available for each of the infants in our set. As negative
examples, we wanted to ﬁnd intervals during which the doctor
considered the infant’s state and could have ordered the
intervention but did not. For this purpose, we chose 60-minute
intervals preceding times when the doctor entered electronic
comments about the infant but did not order the intervention
in question during the hour before or after comment entry.
This procedure resulted in sets of 1862, 966, 930, 806, and
146 intervals for the ﬁve interventions.
In our second set of experiments, we took the 60-minute
intervals prior to measurements of blood pH, blood oxygen,
blood carbon dioxide, and airway resistance that occurred
during the ﬁrst 5000 minutes of monitor data for the infants in
our set. We had 827, 827, 771, and 189 intervals, respectively,
corresponding to these four measurements.

B. Feature Extraction
For each interval, we computed 448 features based on the
heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation signals. We
used ﬁve different approaches to obtaining features:
(i) We computed simple functions of the signals, such as
mean, range, and variability.
(ii) We calculated time-lagged correlation between each pair
of signals. We believed that correlation might be infor-
mative based on our visualization of the data. Moreover,
research on other complications of prematurity shows
that sick infants often have impaired autoregulation [8],
leading to synchronization of physiological signals.
(iii) We used the discrete Fourier transform (DFT) to obtain
features capturing the frequency contents of each signal.
(iv) We applied the Time Series Topic Model (TSTM) de-
veloped by Saria et al. [9]. The TSTM segments the
physiological signal into regions (“words”) generated
by the same autoregressive process, indicating similar
short-term dynamics. The TSTM also learns higher-
level “topics” corresponding to different distributions
over words. As features, we used both word and topic
frequencies obtained from the TSTM.
(v) We learned a two-layer belief network using the sparse
Restricted Boltzmann Machine (RBM) algorithm pro-
posed by Lee et al. [10]. A single example consisted
of the sixty values each of heart rate, respiratory rate,
and oxygen saturation that occurred during one 60-
minute interval. We pre-processed the data by applying
PCA whitening and then learned a sparse RBM model
with 400 hidden units. With the resulting hidden unit

TABLE II
AUC S FOR PLR C LA S S I FIER S TO PR ED IC T IN TERV ENT ION S

Intervention Type
Dextrose administration
ISTAT blood gas measurement
Increase in any ventilator setting
Increase in ventilator FiO2 setting
Increase in ventilator rate setting

Features
Non-RBM RBM All
0.67
0.64
0.65
0.55
0.54
0.54
0.77
0.77
0.72
0.75
0.75
0.70
0.65
0.62
0.60

probabilities, we trained a second sparse RBM layer with
400 hidden units. As features for a given interval, we
used the inferred values of the second-layer hidden units
resulting from feeding the interval’s signals forward
through the trained model.
We normalized each feature to have mean zero and unit
standard deviation so that the weights learned by classiﬁers
would be meaningful in comparison to one another.

C. Predicting Interventions
For each of the ﬁve interventions, we trained a penalized lo-
gistic regression (PLR) classiﬁer using the algorithm proposed
by Zhu and Hastie [11]. On a training set consisting of 70% of
the intervals, we performed ﬁve-fold cross-validation to select
the optimal regularization parameter. More speciﬁcally, for
each of a range of possible parameter values and for each fold,
we computed the AUC of the ROC curve for the classiﬁer’s
outputted probabilities. Using the parameter which maximized
the conservative mean AUC over the folds, we trained a PLR
classiﬁer on the entire training set and then used this classiﬁer
to make predictions on our test set.
We repeated this procedure three times: once with all 448 of
our features, once with only the 400 RBM features (i.e., those
of type (v) in Section V-B), and once with only the 48 non-
RBM features. We separated the features in this way because
we were especially interested to compare the belief networks
with our other feature extraction methods in terms of how
effectively they captured the information in the physiological
signals. The resulting AUCs are reported in Table II and will
be discussed in Section VI.

D. Predicting Measurement Values
We ﬁrst
tried linear regression to predict measurement
values but found that the amount of error was unacceptably
high for each measurement type. We instead decided to attempt
the simpler task of predicting whether the values fell above
or below a given threshold. We observed that NICU doctors
often mentally represent an infant’s blood gas values with
ternary (“high”, “normal”, or “low”) or binary (“abnormal”
or “normal”) values. Thus, we reasoned that a model making
binary predictions of measurement value would be useful to
NICU doctors.
As thresholds separating “low” from “high” for blood
pH, oxygen, and carbon dioxide, we used values indicated
as clinically meaningful by Stanford physicians. For airway
resistance, since such a value was not available, we took the
ROC curve generated for the “maximum resistance” feature

TABLE III
AUC S FOR PLR C LA S S I FIER S TO PR ED IC T M EA SUR EM EN T S

Measurement Type
Blood pH
Blood oxygen
Blood carbon dioxide
Airway resistance

Features
Non-RBM RBM All
0.87
0.76
0.86
0.74
0.68
0.58
0.72
0.68
0.69
0.72
0.56
0.65

from Section III and selected the threshold with the best
sensitivity and speciﬁcity (i.e., the one leading to the point
on the ROC curve closest to the upper left corner (0,1)).
We used the same procedure described in Section V-C to
train PLR classiﬁers. Table III shows the resulting AUC values.

V I . R E SU LT S AND D I SCU S S ION
We found that in each case but one, the non-RBM classiﬁer
outperformed its RBM counterpart. Furthermore, when we
learned classiﬁers using the non-RBM and RBM features to-
gether, we obtained AUCs which were not substantially higher
than those for the non-RBM classiﬁers. For the remainder of
this discussion, then, we focus on the non-RBM classiﬁers.

A. Predicting Interventions
We found that we were unable to accurately predict whether
a given interval preceded a dextrose administration, blood gas
measurement, or ventilator rate increase. To better understand
the problems with our models, we ran the classiﬁers for these
three interventions on their respective training sets to compute
training AUCs.
For dextrose administrations and blood gas measurements,
the training AUCs were low (0.64 and 0.68, respectively), in-
dicating that the classiﬁers failed to separate even the training
examples well. We believe that the most likely explanation
for this poor performance is that NICU doctors rely primarily
on factors other than the physiological signals in deciding
when to order these two interventions. Indeed, one Stanford
clinician informed us that he mainly orders ISTAT blood draws
after adjusting the ventilator, and thus his choice of whether
to order the intervention at a given time does not depend
strongly on the infant’s physiology. In terms of dextrose
administrations, we observed that they generally occurred at
regularly spaced intervals which varied in length for different
infants, suggesting that doctors set a dextrose administration
schedule early on rather than deciding based on the past hour’s
physiological signals. Given that the frequency of dextrose
administrations was predictive of BPD, it would be fruitful to
investigate how NICU doctors set this dextrose schedule.
On the other hand, the ventilator rate increase classiﬁer
had a training AUC (0.82) much higher than its testing AUC.
Thus, it appears that the classiﬁer was overﬁtting, especially
given the relatively small number of examples (146) for this
intervention.
We were fairly successful in predicting whether an interval
preceded a ventilator setting increase or a ventilator FiO2
(fraction of inspired oxygen) increase. We note that the two
classiﬁcation tasks were similar, since the majority of setting

increases were FiO2 increases. One of our main goals in
creating these classiﬁers was to identify physiological sig-
natures useful for BPD prediction. To do so, we examined
the weights that the two classiﬁers assigned to the features.
(Recall that we had normalized feature values so that the
weights would be comparable.) We found that all of the highly
weighted features for both classiﬁers were functions of the
oxygen saturation (OS) signal. This result was not surprising
given that NICU clinicians told us that they often adjust the
ventilator in response to desaturation events (i.e., periods of
low OS). Interestingly, the top features for both classiﬁers
included not only simple functions of the OS signal like mean
and variability but also several features obtained from the
signal’s discrete Fourier transform (DFT). This observation
suggests that the frequency content of the OS signal captures
useful information about desaturation events and therefore has
potential for BPD prediction.

B. Predicting Measurement Values
The classiﬁer for blood pH performed very well. The other
three classiﬁers were also reasonably successful in differenti-
ating high values from low. As discussed in Section IV, these
classiﬁers could be extremely useful in a NICU, giving doctors
noninvasive real-time estimates of an infant’s blood gas values.
To gain insight
into BPD prediction, we examined the
feature weights that our classiﬁers learned. One general ob-
servation was that of our nine total classiﬁers, eight assigned
very high weight to the mean OS feature. This ﬁnding raises
the question of why the mean OS feature was not among
the most predictive of BPD in our initial feature exploration.
We hypothesized that the answer was our segmentation of the
signal into intervals and that, more speciﬁcally, the distribu-
tion of mean OS values over intervals captures more useful
information than the signal’s overall mean OS. Indeed, we
found that the minimum of mean OS values over 60-minute
intervals was more predictive of BPD than either the mean or
the minimum OS value over the ﬁrst 5000 minutes. This result
demonstrates the beneﬁt of focusing on short intervals of the
physiological signals.
Besides mean OS, the measurement classiﬁers learned high
weights for other simple OS features such as variability. Addi-
tionally, DFT-based features of the signals appeared frequently
among the top features for all four classiﬁers, again suggesting
that the frequency contents of the physiological signals have
promise for predicting BPD.
We made two observations which were particularly inter-
esting from a medical perspective. First, we found that the
most highly weighted feature for the resistance classiﬁer was
a function of the heart rate (HR) signal’s DFT. Based on
the sign of the weight, periods of high airway resistance
are characterized by HR signals with more high-frequency
components. This result sheds light on the effect of lung
dynamics on heart rate and, more broadly, the interrelation
between the respiratory and circulatory systems of premature
infants. Our second interesting observation was that both the
blood pH and blood oxygen classiﬁers learned high weight

for the correlation between the HR and OS signals. Beyond
suggesting a feature for BPD prediction, this link between
high HR/OS alignment and low blood pH and blood oxygen
levels provides insight into an unhealthy infant’s ability (or
lack thereof) to autoregulate his body systems.

V I I . CR EAT ING A BPD C LA S S I FIER
By examining the weights learned by our various classiﬁers,
we identiﬁed sixteen features as potentially useful for BPD
prediction: four simple OS features, ten DFT features, HR/OS
correlation, and mean RR. With the addition of the two
physiology-based features found to be predictive of BPD in
our initial exploration, we had a set of eighteen features.
Rather than classifying infants as BPD or control, we de-
cided to create a model that would classify 60-minute intervals
as BPD or not. We had several reasons for making this choice.
First, we saw an example in Section VI-B in which focusing
on 60-minute intervals led to a more predictive feature for
BPD than working with the entire 5000-minute signal at
once. Second, our previous experiments were performed using
60-minute intervals, so some of our features (namely those
based on the DFT) applied speciﬁcally to intervals of that
length. Finally, we believed that an interval classiﬁer would
be more valuable to NICU doctors, as it would let them
obtain predictions every hour and thereby gauge changes in
an infant’s BPD risk over time and with different treatments.
Ideally, we would train and test our BPD interval classiﬁer
on data taken from a new set of infants, since we already
used data from our current set to create the intervention and
measurement classiﬁers. Unfortunately, as obtaining data for
new infants requires efforts by multiple people to label and
pre-process the data into usable form, we were unable to create
a new data set within the time frame of this project.
Instead, we learned a BPD classiﬁer using the same data set
from our previous experiments. We started by segmenting each
infant’s ﬁrst 5000 minutes of data into 60-minute intervals.
Then, with the eighteen features described above, we trained
a PLR classiﬁer on 500 randomly-chosen intervals, using the
Bayesian information criterion to select the optimal value of
the regularization parameter. We ran the resulting classiﬁer
on all of the remaining intervals. To obtain an overall BPD
risk score for a given infant, we computed the proportion of
that infant’s intervals which were classiﬁed as BPD (excluding
from the computation any intervals which were included in the
training set). These scores achieved AUCs of 0.89 and 0.80
on the full set and age/weight-matched set, respectively.

V I I I . CONC LU S ION AND FU TUR E WORK
The ﬁnal product of our project was a physiology-based
BPD interval classiﬁer which achieved strong results on our
data set. We would like to train and test this classiﬁer on a
new and larger set of infants to verify whether accurate BPD
prediction is indeed possible with our chosen features.
In addition to developing a BPD classiﬁer, we created nine
intervention and measurement classiﬁers, several of which
performed well and could be very useful in a NICU. We

also identiﬁed informative features related to signal frequency
content and HR/OS correlation, a valuable ﬁnding not just for
predicting BPD but also for understanding it biologically.
There are a number of directions in which we would like
to extend this work. For one, given our observation that
segmenting a signal into intervals can yield more predictive
features, we would like to repeat our experiments using
different interval lengths to determine which one is optimal.
We are also interested in further exploring the relationship
between cross-signal correlation and BPD by developing more
sophisticated measures of correlation tailored to our speciﬁc
application. In terms of learning algorithms, we would like to
check whether SVMs can outperform our PLR classiﬁers.
Finally, we are interested in characterizing the differences
between BPD and control infants in terms of response to
interventions, particularly ventilator adjustments. Our hypoth-
esis is that interventions cause more dramatic changes in the
physiological signals of a BPD infant than a control, since
BPD infants are less able to autoregulate effectively. In a
preliminary experiment, we examined intervals extending from
30 minutes before to 30 minutes after an intervention. Using
as features the differences in simple functions of the signals
before and after the intervention, we attempted to classify the
intervals as BPD or control. Our classiﬁers performed poorly,
so we would like to try to improve them by identifying features
that better capture response characteristics.
IX . ACKNOW L EDGM ENT S
I would like to thank Suchi Saria for her guidance throughout
the course of the project, Dr. Anand Rajani and Dr. Valerie Chock
for answering our questions about the NICU, and Jiquan Ngiam for
letting us use and helping us understand his sparse RBM code.
R E F ER ENC E S
[1] Walsh, M. et al. Summary proceedings from the bronchopul-
monary dysplasia group. Pediatrics 117(3), S52-56 (2006).
[2] Kinsela, J., Greenough, A. & Abman, S. Bronchopulmonary
dysplasia. Lancet 367(9520), 1421-31 (2006).
[3] Jobe, A. & Ikegami, M. Mechanisms initiating lung injury in the
preterm. Early Hum Dev 53(1), 81-94 (1998).
[4] Van Marter, L. et al. Do clinical markers of barotrauma and
oxygen toxicity explain interhospital variation in rates of chronic
lung disease? Pediatrics 105(6), 1194-1201 (2000).
[5] Garland, J. et al. Hypocarbia before surfactant therapy appears
to increase bronchopulmonary dysplasia risk in infants with
respiratory distress syndrome. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 149(6),
617-22 (1995).
[6] Yoder, B., Anwar, M. & Clark, R. Early prediction of neonatal
chronic lung disease: a comparison of three scoring methods.
Pediatr Pulm 27(6), 388-94 (1999).
[7] Khosla, A. et al. An integrated machine learning approach to
stroke prediction. ACM SIGKDD International Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2010).
[8] Kaiser, J. The association of high-magnitude cerebral passivity
and intraventricular hemorrhage in premature infants. Pediatrics
124(1), 384-86 (2009).
[9] Saria, S. et al. Discovering shared and individual latent structure
in multiple time series. Under review (2010).
[10] Lee, H., Ekanadham, C. & Ng, A. Sparse deep belief net model
for visual area V2. NIPS (2007).
[11] Zhu, J. & Hastie, J. Classiﬁcation of gene microarrays by
penalized logistic regression. Biostatistics 5(3), 427-43 (2004).

