Modeling Activity Patterns 

Nipun Dave, Aditya Gudipati, Shantanu Kurhekar 

CS 229, Fall 2010, Stanford University 

 
Abstract  -  This  paper  describes  a  simple  model  based  on 
supervised  learning  that  can  learn  an  individual’s  activity 
pattern  with  the  data  acquired  through  their  cell  phones. 
This model  can  thereafter  be used  to  predict  an  individual’s 
location after a  transition  and  the  time  of  the  transition. We 
also  present  two  supervised  learning  models  that  can 
accurately  predict  if  a  strong  friendship  exists  between  two 
individuals or not.  
 
Index Terms  – Activity profiling, Activity modeling,  location 
prediction, relationship prediction.  

I.  INTRODUCTION 

Over  the  past  few  years,  cell  phones  have  become  a  necessity 
that  people  always  carry  on  person.  Cell  phones  have  a  wide 
variety  of  sensors  that  can  gather  information  about  the 
individual’s  social  context,  including  location  with  respect  to 
time,  other  individuals  in  proximity  and  interactions  like  calls 
and text messages exchanged. This data can be used to learn and 
predict  an  individual’s  future  activity,  specifically,  in  terms  of 
location and  time.  It can also be used  to  infer strengths of social 
relationships between individual users. These predictions enable 
better 
targeted-advertising,  personalization  of  smart-phone 
applications  and  more  efficient  allocation  of  infrastructure, 
among other purposes.  
The  Reality  Mining  group  at  MIT,  in  collaboration  with 
Nokia, carried out a project to study complex interactions within 
social  groups  in  2004-05  [1].  The  original  Reality  Mining 
experiment  was  one  of  the  largest  mobile  phone  projects 
attempted  which  leveraged  the  increasingly  widespread  use  of 
mobile phones  to provide  insight  into dynamics of  individual a s 
well  as  group  behavior.  More  specifically,  the  research  at  MIT 
addressed questions  related  to evolution of social  networks over 
time,  predictability  of  user  activity,  flow  of  information  and 
inferring topology of a social network from proximity data. 
Nathan  Eagle  and  Alex  Pentland  employed  PCA  to  identify 
the  individual’s  principal  behaviors  in  terms  of  their  location  as 
a  function  of  time,  called  as  eigenbehaviors.  These  locations 
were  described  with  5  different 
labels,  namely,  Home, 
Elsewhere,  Work,  No  Signal  and  Off  [2].  The  individual’s 
behavior  during  the  first  half  on  the  day  is  projected  on  these 
eigenbehaviors  to  obtain  their  weights,  which  is  then  used  to 
predict their behavior for the rest of the day. The eigenbehaviors 
for  the  individuals  are  also  used  to  cluster  them  and  thereby 
infer  their  community  affiliations.  K.  Laasonen  et  al  present  an 
adaptive  framework,  implementable  on  a  phone,  for  identifying 
locations  and  routes  important  to  an  individual  from  cellular 
network  data  [3].  This  framework  uses  adaptive  weighting  of 
locations based on the number of times the individual goes there 
and  also  the  time  since  the  last  visit.  Thereafter,  the  important 

route  is  determined  by  sorting  the  locations  in  terms  of  their 
weights  in  a  descending  order.  A  more  detailed  description  of 
the related work can be found in [2].   
Our  project presents  a model  to  predict  an  individual’s  future 
location  at  a  much  finer  level.  This  model  predicts  the 
transitions,  rather  than  the  actual  locations  at  each  instant  of 
time.  We  also  present  two  models  that  determine  if  two 
individuals  are  close  friends.  We  use  the  data  made  public  by 
MIT  Reality  Mining  project  for  building  and  evaluating  our 
model [1]. This dataset contains logs gathered for 94 individuals 
at MIT over the course of the  academic year of September 2004 
-  June  2005.  These  individuals  were  Sloan  Business  school 
students,  Media  Lab  incoming  students,  Media  Lab  senior 
students or MIT Staff. Overall, this data represents over 350,000 
hours of continuous data on human behavior. More  specifically, 
it  contains  information  about  passive  behavior  such  as  location 
(from  cell  tower  ids),  other  proximate  individuals  (from 
Bluetooth  device  discovery  scans),  and  active  behavior  such  as 
phone  activity,  including  voice  calls  and  text  messages,  active 
applications  (such  as  the  calendar  or  games),  and  the  phone’s 
charging  status.  It  also  had  self-reported  relational  data  for each 
individual,  where 
they  reported 
their  proximity 
to,  and 
friendship with, others.  
Section  2  gives  a  description  of  the  different  models 
employed  predicting  an  individual’s  location  after  a  transition 
and  the  time  of  transition.  Section  3  presents  the  models  for 
capturing the factors in a relationship and thereafter predicting if 
a particular relationship is close friendship or not. An evaluation 
of  these  models  is  given  in  Section  4.  Section  5  presents  our 
conclusions. 

II.  LOCATION PREDICTION 

Most  individuals  have  a  well-defined  routine  in  terms  of  their 
daily  activities  and  social  context  of  these  activities,  which 
includes  time,  location  and  their  companions.   This  regularity  is 
definitely not  a  trait  exclusive  to  the  subjects  considered  for  the 
study.  Typically,  a  weekday  comprises  leaving  home  in  the 
morning,  traveling  to  work,  breaking  for  lunch,  and  returning 
home  in  the evening. These daily  routines are  also coupled with 
routines  across  other  temporal  scales,  such  as  going  out  with 
friends  on  weekends,  or  spending  time  with  family  during  the 
holidays.  
By  capturing  knowledge  about  an  individual’s  past  ac tivities 
and  the  context  into  an  appropriate  model,  their  future  activity 
can  be  predicted,  given  the  current  context.  There  are  two 
equivalent  ways  of  modeling  this  system  -  based  on  the 
individual’s  transitions  or  based  on  their  actual  location  versus 
time.  We  focus  on  the  former  wherein  we  predict  the 
individual’s  transitions.  Specifically,  this  includes  predicting 

when  the  transition  will  occur  and  where  the  individual  would 
be after the transition.  
In  the  data,  the  location  is  determined  in  terms  of  the  cell 
tower IDs. Each handoff from one cell to another is logged with 
the  transition  time  and  the  tower  ID  of  the  new  cell.  The  cells 
are then grouped together into areas and are assigned an area ID. 
We  focus  on  predicting  the  location  at  the  level  of  these  areas, 
individual  cells.  We  are  not  assuming  any 
rather 
than 
restrictions  on 
the  memory  or  computational  complexity 
presently.  

A.  Feature Selection 

The  future  location  of  an  individual  typically  depends  on  the 
following factors:  

1.  Current location: An individual can move to only 
one  of  the  neighboring  areas  from  the  current 
location.  
2.  Day  of  the  week:  Depending  on  the  day  of  the 
week,  an  individual  might  or  might  not  visit  a 
particular area.   
3.  Time  of  the  day:  The  time  of  the  day  determines 
if the individual is more likely to be at home, work 
or traveling.  

While  there  are  many  more  parameters  that  have  an  impact  on 
an  individual’s  future  location,  we  consider  only  these  three   for 
the sake of simplicity.  

The  individuals  visited  992  different  areas  over  a  span  of  9 
months.  Taking into account the fact that, most of the transitions 
from  a  particular  area  are  into  the  same  area  or  one  of  the 
adjacent  areas,  the  number  of  nonzero  transition  probabilities 
become  significantly  smaller.  We  determined  the  set  of  areas 
adjacent  to  an  area  for  all  the  992  areas  through  the  transitions 
logged  across  all  users.  Thereafter,  the  transition  probabilities 
from one area were learned only for a transition to  the same area 
or one of these neighboring areas.  

B.  Supervised Learning Models 

For  the  listed  set  of  parameters,  we  tested  a  supervised  learning 
algorithm,  Naïve  Bayes,  to  obtain  results  for  accuracy  of 
prediction.  These  parameters  are  certainly  not  independent  of 
each  other.  We  evaluated  this  model  over  different  sets  of 
independency  assumptions  to  determine  the  one which  gave  the 
best performance. The baseline for performance was established 
with the Random Guessing model. 
 
1)  Random Guessing 
The  probability  of  being  in  a  location  is  learned  using  the  data 
logs  for  each  individual.  This  distribution  was  learned  for  each 
individual.  The  future  location  for  the  individual  was  thereafter 
guessed  by  sampling  from 
this  distribution.  This  very 
rudimentary  model  does  not 
incorporate  any  additional 
knowledge  we  have  about  the  system.  Hence,  it  was  used  to 
establish  a  baseline  for  measuring  the  performance  of  other 
more complex prediction models.  
 
2)  Naïve Bayes 
A  Naïve  Bayes  classifier  assumes  that  the  value  of  a  particular 
parameter  is  independent  of  the  value  of  any  other  parameters, 
even  if  they  could  be  dependent  on  each  other  or  upon  the 

existence  of  other  parameters.  The  primary  advantage  of  this 
classifier  is  that  it  simplifies  the  classification  problem  by 
making  strong  assumptions  and  requires  a  small  amount  of 
training data to estimate the classification parameters. 
 
 The  current  location  parameter  models  the  probability  of 
transitioning  from  the  current  area  ID  to  a  particular  location.  
Current location parameter ensures that the predicted future area 
is adjacent to the current area. 
The  day  of  the  week  parameter  models  the  probability  of 
transition to a particular location on the current day of the week . 
For  eg.,  this  parameter  would  incorporate  the  fact  that  people 
are less likely to go to their offices on weekends.  
The  entire  day  was  broken  into  24  slots  of  one  hour  each.  The 
time of the day parameter models the probability of transition to 
a  particular  location  at  the  current  time  slot.  For  eg.,  this 
parameter would incorporate  the fact that people are more  likely 
to stay in their homes at night. 

C.   Transition Prediction 

As  mentioned  previously,  we  predict  when  the  user  makes  the 
next  transition  and  where  the  individual  would  be  after  the 
transition. 

1)  Time of Transition Prediction 
The  duration  between  successive  transitions  can  vary  from  less 
than  a  minute  to  more  than  a  day.  Typically,  the  former  case  is 
observed  when  the  individual  is  traveling  through  a  particular 
area  and  the  latter  case  is  seen  when  the  individual  stays  at  a 
particular  location  for  a  long  time.   We want  to model  the  order 
of magnitude of time spent before the next transition, rather than 
the  exact 
time  spent.  Hence,  we  considered  different 
discretizations  of  the  duration  between  successive  transitions 
and  compared  accuracy  of  the  models  obtained  from  each 
method.  These  boundaries  were  empirically  chosen.  One  such 
discretization is given below: 

1.  Between 0 and 5 minutes 
2.  Between 5 and 15 minutes 
3.  Between 15 and 30 minutes 
4.  Between 30 and 60 minutes 
5.  Between 1 and 6 hours 
6.  More than 6 hours 

The  training  data  was  used  to  train  a  model  based  on  Naive 
Bayes  to  predict  the  next  transition  time  and  this  model  was 
applied  on  the  test  set  to  find  the  training  error  over  all 
individuals.  The  parameters  used  for  training  are  their  previous 
time  of  transition  and  their  current  location.  The  model  had  an 
accuracy of 91.55%. This may be an indicator that the time slots 
chosen  are  inappropriate  as  it  may  to  be  fairly  easy  to  classify 
transition  times  in  terms of  these  time  slots.  So, we changed  the 
discretization  boundaries  and  compared  the  results.  The  new 
discretization  considered  is  given  below.  This  is  considered  to 
be more meaningful for the applications we envision.   

1.  Between 0 and 1 minute 
2.  Between 1 and 5 minutes 
3.  Between 5 and 10 minutes 
4.  Between 10 and 15 minutes 
5.  Between 15 and 20 minutes 
6.  More than 20 minutes 

The  accuracy  with  this  model  was  78.70%,  much  lower  than 
that  for  the  previous  case. The  fact  that  the  accuracy  goes  down 
can be countered by training the model on more data.   
It is clear from this experiment that the accuracy of the model 
depends  on  the  discretization  chosen  and  hence,  the  degree  of 
accuracy desired by the application can be a crucial parameter in 
deciding  the  discretization  boundaries.  A  better  method  of 
choosing  the  distribution  of  duration  between  successive 
transitions  can  be  a  part  of  the  future  work  for  this  project.  The 
experiment  was  repeated  by  adding  the  previous  location  too   as 
a  parameter.  In  this  case,  the  accuracy  improved by only  0.04% 
which 
is  not  significant.  This  also  confirms  our  initial 
assumption  that  the  Markov  property  applies  to  the  parameters 
used for modeling the predictor. 

2)  Location Prediction 
Given  the  fact  that a cell-to-cell  transition occurred  recently and 
given  the  information  about  the  current  location,  current  time 
and  the  day,  we  predict  the  future  location  of  the  user  after  the 
next  transition.  As  mentioned  before,  the  random  guess  was 
used  as  the  baseline  for  the  performance  of  our  models.  The 
Naïve  Bayes  model  was  implemented  with  different  sets  of 
parameters  and  different  independence  assumptions.  These  are 
given in Table 1 along with the accuracy.   

III.  SOCIAL RELATIONSHIP PREDICTION 

Broadly, the ways of communication between two individuals 
includes  talking  face-to-face,  talking and  texting over  the phone 
or  messaging  through  various  online  media.    The  strength  of  a 
relationship  between  them  has  a  significant  impact  on  these 
interactions.  The  stronger  a  relationship,  the  more  frequent  and 
longer are  these  interactions. We  focus on  learning a model  that 
captures  the  differences  in  these  communications  with  a  close 
friend  versus  that  with  others.    Thereafter,  this  model  can  be 
used  to  estimate  the  strength  of  relationships,  primarily  if  two 
individuals are close friends or not.  
In 
the  dataset, 
information  about  proximity  between 
individuals was captured  through Bluetooth. The devices visible 
to  a  phone  were  logged  periodically  (every  5  minutes).  The 
interactions  over  the  phone  in  the  form  of  voice  calls  and  text 
are also logged. However, the  interactions over online media are 
not available. While the available data does not sufficiently span 
the different kinds of relationships and their manifestation in the 
communication,  we  believe  that  the  patterns  learned  are 
sufficiently  representative  of  the  group  of  individuals  for  which 
the data was gathered.  
Triangle-closure is a dominant mechanism for edge-formation 
in  social  networks  [4].  This  has  been  shown  to  be  true  for 
formation  of  connections  in  sites  like  LinkedIn,  Flickr  etc. 
However,  these  connections  might  not  always  correspond  to  a 
close  relationship.  To  ensure  a  simple  model,  we  assume  that 
the  labels  of  the  relationships  are  independent  of  others.    We 
implemented  two  algorithms,  Naïve  Bayes  and  SVM  for 
labeling  a  particular  relationship.  We  considered  the  7  features 
given below in our models: 

1.  Mean Call Duration 
2.  Standard Deviation of Call Duration 
3.  Number of Calls 

4.  Mean Duration of Proximity 
5.  Standard Deviation of Proximity 
6.  Number of times proximate to each other  
7.  Listed as a contact in the phone book. 

These  parameters  were  extracted  from  the  Bluetooth  logs  of 
each individual.   We also observed that the data contained some 
asymmetry.  In  some  cases  the  durations  for  which  two  people 
were  together  as  recorded  by  their  phones  were  significantly 
different.  We  believe  this  can  be  attributed  to  temporal 
staggering  of  the  logs  and   occasional  low  reception  power  at 
one  of  the  phones  resulting  in  missing  the  transmitter’s 
presence.  

A.  Logistic Classifier 

With  only  two  possible  labels  for  a  relationship,  we  model  the 
conditional  distribution  of  the  label  given  the  values  of 
parameters  as  a  Binomial  distribution.  Hence,  the  hypothesis 
function          is  the  logistic  function                 .  The 
parameter      is  of  size         where     is  the  number  of  features 
chosen.  It  was  learned  using  batch  gradient  ascent  rule  with 
learning rate         .  

B.  SVM 

 

We  used  the  SVM  Toolbox  completely  implemented  in Matlab 
[5].  We  evaluated  the  performance  of  SVM  with  2  different 
kernel  functions:  Gaussian  Radial  basis  function  (RBF)  and  the 
linear  kernel.  Since  we  have  a  small  number  of  features,  we 
expect 
the 
SVM 
with 
Gaussian 
kernel 
                               
 ,  which  map  the  data  to  a 
higher  dimensional  space  to  be  able  to  label  the  relationships 
more  accurately.  There  are  two  parameters  which  impact  the 
performance of an SVM with a Gaussian RBF, namely, C and   . 
C  is  L1  regularization  parameter.  As  mentioned  in  [6],  we 
performed a grid search over the values of C and      to determine 
the  values  resulting  in  the  best  performance.  The  performance 
was  measured  as  the  fraction  of  the  true  positives  identified  by 
the SVM. This  is based on  the  fact  that any application utilizing 
such  a  system  would  be  expected  to  identify  most  of  the  close 
friends even if there are few false positives.   

IV.  RESULTS 

A.   Future Transition Prediction 

We  have  considered  the  accuracy  to  be  the  fraction  of 
predictions which are correct. The accuracy averaged over all 94 
individuals  is  used  as  the metric  for  evaluating  the  performance 
of the models. The models are learned using 70% of the log data 
for each individual and then tested over the remaining 30%.  The 
predictions  of  time  until  transition  and  the  location  after 
transition  are  done  independently  of  each  other.  We  are  not 
imposing  a  time  limit  on  the  validity  of  the  prediction  of  the 
next location. However, doing this could potentially improve the 
performance of the models even further.   

 

Future Location Prediction Model   
Random Prediction  
NB Prediction given Current Location  
NB Prediction given  
Current Location & Day of Week 

Accuracy  
30% 
77% 

68% 

NB Prediction given  
Current Location & Time of Day 
NB Prediction given  
Current Location, Day of Week & Current Time 
NB Prediction given  
(Current Location, Day of Week)  
NB Prediction given  
(Current Location, Day of Week) & Time of Day 

72% 

66% 

67% 

65% 

Table 1. Prediction of Future Location after Transition 

The  accuracy  we  obtained  for  models  with  different 
independence  assumptions  are  given  in  Table  1. We  obtained  a 
47%  improvement  in  performance  on  an  average  when  we  had 
knowledge  about  the  individual’s  current  location.  However, 
relative  to  this  model,  we  observed  a  slight  deterioration  in 
performance  when  we  included  our  knowledge  about  additional 
temporal  parameters  such  as  the  current  time  of  the  day  and  the 
day  of  the week.  The  sparsity of  the  data  also  contributes  to  the 
increase  in  error  to  some  extent.  This  decrease  in  accuracy  is 
also  because  of  the  fact  that  we  train  over  the  first  70%  of  the 
data  set  (~5  months)  and  then  test  over  the  remaining  30%  (~3 
months).  However,  the  weekly  routines  of  individuals  might 
change  over  a  span of 3 months  and  hence predictions  based on 
the  day  of  the  week  might  be  erroneous.  To  capture  these 
changes  in  weekly  routines,  the  training  and  testing  data  should 
be  done  differently.  For  example,  the  training  could  be  done 
over 3 weeks and tested in the fourth week.   
Some  individuals  have  a  fairly  consistent  weekly  routine 
whereas  some  do  not.  The  ones  with  steady  routines  stayed  in 
the  same  location  for  a  longer  duration.  For  these  individuals, 
we saw that the Naive Bayes model performed much better.   

 

Future Transition Time Prediction Model  
NB Prediction given Current Location & Prev.  
Transition Time 
NB Prediction given Current & Previous Location 

Accuracy 

78.70% 

78.74% 

Table 2. Prediction of Future Transition Time  

B.  Relationship Prediction 

The  data  had  overall  8556  labeled  relationships.  Out  of  these, 
only  108  were  labeled  as  close  friends  (considered  as  a 
positive). We  observed  that  this  labeling  was  not  symmetric.  If 
one  individual  called  another  as  a  close  friend,  the  reverse  was 
not  always  true.  To  ensure  that  the  our  model  does  not  get  too 
biased  by  either  label,  our  training  set  had  54  data  points  of 
close friends and 54 data points of not close friends. The models 
were  tested  over  54  data  points  of  positive  labels  and  500  data 
points  with  negative  labels.  The  accuracy  obtained  with  both 
models is given in Table 3. 

  

Relationship 
Prediction 
Model  
Logistic  
Classifier 
SVM (Gaussian 
Kernel) 

False 
Pos. 

False 
Neg. 

True 
Pos. 

True 
Neg. 

Accuracy 

394 

8 

46 

107 

28% 

128 

20 

34 

373 

73% 

Table 3. Prediction of Future Transition Time 

Logistic  Classifier  had  many  more  false  positives  than  SVM  
while  SVM  correctly  labeled  most  true  negatives .  However, 
Logistic  classifier  identified  the  positive  scenarios  much  more 
accurately    than did SVM. Based on  the weights assigned  to  the 
different  parameters,  it  was  seen  that  the  higher  the  average 
duration  of  call  and  of  proximity  and  the  lower  their  standard 
deviations,  the  higher  was  the  likelihood  of  the  relationship 
being a close  friendship. SVM with a  linear kernel was not able 
to separate  the points, which  implies  that  the data  is not  linearly 
separable.  Hence,  we  did  not  perform  any  further  evaluation 
with a linear kernel.  
On  increasing  the number of data points with negative  labels, 
both  methods  accurately  labeled  a  smaller  number  of  positives 
and a larger number of negatives. The training set was chosen to 
ensure  that  the  positive  labels  were  also  classified  accurately. 
The  performance  of  the  algorithms,  in  terms  of  the  ability  to 
accurately  identify  the  data  points  with  positive  labels,  can  be 
improved further with more data points having positive labels.     

V.  CONCLUSION 

In  conclusion,  we  note  that   the  daily  routines  of  different 
individuals  can  be  learned  using  simple  supervised  learning 
algorithms  and  these  models  can  then  be  used  to  predict  their 
locations across time. These predictions can be further improved 
by  incorporating  additional  factors  such  as  the  current  mode  of 
transportation  of  the  individual,  other  individuals  in  their 
proximity,  information  about  their  schedule,  etc.  It  is  also 
possible  to  predict  the  location  at  a  finer  level,  i.e.  individual 
cells,  by  first  predicting  the  area  and  then  predicting  the  most 
likely  cell  within  the  area.  An  alternative  technique  is  to 
incorporate  metadata  about  each  location  into  the  model  and 
learn  their  transitions.  This  metadata  should  capture  the  user’s 
activity  in  that  location.    For  example,  it  could  include  the  fact 
that the location is a theater or an office or a train station.   
We  also  showed  that  it  is  possible  to  use  information  about 
the  communication  and  proximity  between  two  individuals, 
which  can  be  acquired  using  a  phone,  to  predict  the  strength  of 
the  relationship  between  them.  In  this  case,  it  is  seen  that  the 
models  are  quite  accurate  after  training  with  a  training  set 
having  a  small  number  of  labeled  relationships.  The  SVM 
performs well in terms of identifying the negative cases whereas 
the  Logistic  Classifier  performs  better  in  identifying  strong 
friendships.  These  predictions  can  be  enhanced  further  by 
exploiting  the  fact  that  many  friendships  are  formed  by   the 
triangle-closure mechanism.  

VI.  REFERENCES 

[1]  N.  Eagle,  A.  Pentland,  and  D.  Lazer  (2009),  “Inferring 
Social  Network  Structure  using  Mobile  Phone  Data”, 
Proceedings 
Sciences 
of 
the  National  Academy 
of 
(PNAS),106(36), pp. 15274-15278 
[2]  N.  Eagle  and  A.  Pentland  (2009),  "Eigenbehaviors: 
Identifying  Structure  in  Routine" ,  Behavioral  Ecology  and 
Sociobiology 63:7, 1057-1066. 
[3]  K.  Laasonen,  M.  Raento,  H.  Toivonen,  “Adaptive  On-
Device  Location  Recognition”,  Proceedings  for  Pervasive, 
Springer Verlag, pp 287-304, 2004. 

[4]  J.  Leskovec,  L.  Backstrom,  R.  Kumar  and  A.  Tomkins, 
“Microscopic  Evolution  of  Social  Networks”,  KDD’08,  Las 
Vegas, USA.  
[5]  S.  Canu  and  Y.  Grandvalet  and  V.  Guigue  and  A. 
Rakotomamonjy,  “SVM  and Kernel Methods Matlab Toolbox”,  
Perception  Systèmes  et  Information,  INSA  de  Rouen,  Rouen, 
France, 2005.  
[6] C. Hsu, C. Chang, and C. Lin. “A Practical Guide to Support 
Vector  Classification”  Technical  Report  Department  of 
Computer  Science  and  Information  Engineering,  National 
Taiwan University, 2003.  

