	  

VC-­‐Robot	  

Mar	  Hershenson	  
marita@stanford.edu	  
December	  10,	  2010	  

1.	  Abstract	  
	  
In	   the	   start-­‐up	   investing	   community,	   many	   think	   that	   investing	   is	   an	   art	   more	   than	   a	   science.	   Investing	  
decisions	   from	  angels	  and	  venture	  capitalists	  are	  based	  many	   times	   in	   intuition	   (first	   impressions),	  simple	  rules	  
of	   thumb	   (e.g.,	   if	   founder	   is	   a	   graduate	   student	   from	   Stanford	   I	   will	   invest),	   herd	   mentality	   (e.g.,	   if	   Kleiner-­‐
Perkins	   has	   invested	   in	   this	   company	   I	   should	   too	   despite	   the	   price),	   etc.	   Few	   investment	   decisions	   are	   based	  
on	   quantifiable	   arguments.	   	   In	   fact,	  most	   investors	   do	   not	   believe	   it	   is	   possible	   to	   come	   up	  with	   a	   quantitative	  
model	   for	   venture	   investing.	   The	   goal	   of	   this	   project	   is	   to	   build	   a	   quant	   "VC	   Robot"	   that	   predicts	   success	   of	   a	  
start-­‐up	   company	   based	   on	   some	   measurable	   features.	   	   	   We	   show	   in	   section	   4,	   that	   the	   robot	   built	   has	  
significantly	  higher	  hit	  rate	  than	  an	  average	  venture	  capitalitst.	  

2.	  Data	  Collection	  
	  
Obtaining	   a	   good	   and	   large	   enough	   data	   is	   one	   of	   the	   biggest	   challenges	   in	   this	   project.	   Data	   gathering	   is	  
complex	   for	   various	   reasons:	   easily	   accessible	   data	   is	   skewed	   (much	   more	   data	   available	   on	   successful	  
companies),	  data	  can	  only	  be	  retrieved	  manually	  (free	  online	  databases	  are	  not	  complete)	  and	  private	  data	  like	  
is	  either	  not	  available	  or	  available	  via	  expensive	  subscriptions.	  

2.1.	  Training	  data	  set	  
	  
Rather	  than	  choosing	  from	  any	  available	  start-­‐up	  data,	  I	  imposed	  the	  following	  restrictions	  on	  the	  training	  set:	  
	  

1.  Company	   must	   belong	   to	   the	   semiconductor	   industry.	   The	   company	   must	   be	   shipping	   integrated	  
circuits	   or	   intellectual	   property	   directly	   dropped	   in	   integrated	   circuits	   (ICs).	   I	   have	   excluded	   some	  
neighboring	   industries	  such	  as	  the	  electronic	  design	  automation	   industry	  (EDA)	  that	  provides	  software	  
tools	   for	   the	   design	   of	   ICs,	   semiconductor	   equipment	   companies,	   semiconductor	   manufacturing	  
companies,	  etc.	  Although	  I	  plan	  to	  lift	  this	  restriction	  in	  the	  near	  future,	  for	  now	  it	  allows	  me	  to	  have	  a	  
consistent	  set	  of	  data	  with	  similar	  macroeconomic	  expectations.	  	  
2.  The	   companies	   had	   to	   be	   founded	   in	   1999	   or	   later.	   This	   restriction	   was	   due	   to	   the	   fact	   that	   there	   is	  
little	  consistent	  data	  online	  for	  companies	  that	  were	  founded	  earlier.	  
3.  The	   company	   must	   have	   raised	   some	   money	   from	   venture	   capitalists	   at	   some	   time	   during	   their	  
lifetime.	   Again,	   this	   restriction	   was	   also	   due	   to	   the	   fact	   that	   there	   is	   barely	   any	   data	   accessible	   for	  
companies	  that	  are	  angel	  financing,	  or	  that	  died	  before	  raising	  any	  venture	  money.	  	  
If	   the	   company	   is	   still	   alive	   and	  has	  not	  had	   a	   liquidity	  event,	   I	  have	  excluded	   it	   from	   the	  data	   set.	  My	  
plan	  is	  to	  use	  our	  model	  to	  predict	  whether	  these	  companies	  will	  be	  successful.	  

4. 

	  
With	   these	   restrictions	   I	   have	   been	   able	   to	   find	   data	   on	   115	   companies.	   As	   I	   created	   the	   model,	   I	   found	   that	  
after	   70	   companies,	   the	   training	   and	   test	   error	   were	   similar	   so	   no	   more	   companies	   were	   needed.	   At	   the	  
moment,	  I	  have	  used	  the	  following	  feature	  set.	  
	  

1.  Total	  funding	  received	  
2.  Location	  measured	  as	  distance	  of	  company	  headquarters	  to	  Santa	  Clara,	  CA	  (Intel	  headquarters)	  
3.  Year	  it	  was	  founded	  
4.  Year	  it	  exited	  (either	  IPO,	  acquisition	  or	  bankruptcy)	  
5.  Number	  of	  Silicon	  Valley	  “Tier	  1”	  venture	  investors.	  I	  define	  “Tier	  1”	  venture	  investors	  that	  are	  at	  least	  
fifteen	  years	  old	  and	  have	  more	  than	  $1B	  in	  assets	  under	  management.	  

6.  Number	  of	  corporate	  investors	  
7.  One	  of	  the	  founders	  was	  CEO	  at	  the	  time	  of	  exit	  
8.  One	  of	  the	  founders	  was	  CTO	  at	  the	  time	  of	  exit	  
9.  The	   CEO	   had	   a	   technical	   background	   (at	   least	   MS	   or	   PhD	   in	   a	   technical	   field	   and	   had	   held	   some	  
technical	  role	  in	  a	  previous	  company)	  
10.  The	  CEO	  had	  been	  at	  a	  start-­‐up	  before	  
11.  One	  of	  the	  founders	  holds	  a	  degree	  from	  a	  top	  university	  
12.  Total	  number	  of	  founders	  
13.  Total	  number	  of	  investors	  
14.  Amount	  of	  initial	  series	  A	  investment.	  
15.  Time	  of	  series	  A	  investment.	  	  
16.  Amount	  of	  initial	  series	  B	  investment.	  
17.  Time	  of	  series	  B	  investment.	  
18.  Amount	  of	  initial	  series	  C	  investment.	  
19.  Time	  of	  series	  C	  investment.	  
20.  Amount	  of	  initial	  series	  D	  investment.	  
21.  Time	  of	  series	  D	  investment.	  

	  
The	  quantity	  we	  are	  interested	  in	  measuring	  is	  the	  return	  on	  investment.	  I	  have	  recorded	  the	  total	  exit	  price	  for	  
each	   company.	   From	   that	   we	   can	   create	   several	   criteria	   of	   success	   (return	   on	   investment	   larger	   than	   some	  
threshold,	  return	  compounded	  yearly,	  etc.).	  	  

2.2.	  Data	  Collection	  Process	  
	  
Collecting	   the	   data	   was	   an	   extremely	   manual	   and	   slow	   process	   that	   has	   taken	   me	   tens	   of	   hours.	   	   Although	   I	  
contacted	   several	  private	  database	  holders	  and	  well-­‐known	   individual	   investors,	  no	  one	  wanted	   to	  provide	  me	  
access	   to	   the	   data.	   I	   also	   worked	   with	   the	   Stanford	   Business	   School	   Library	   but	   unfortunately	   they	   also	   don’t	  
have	   access	   to	   data	   I	   could	   use.	   Towards	   the	   end	   of	   the	   project,	   I	   got	   access	   to	   VentureSource[1]	   database	  
which	  has	  helped	  collect	  some	  of	  the	  data.	  Additional	  data	  was	  obtained:	  
	  

1.  From	   free	   online	   databases	   Crunchbase[2],	   VentureBeat[3]	   and	   semi-­‐free	   SiliconTap[4].	   The	  
maintenance	   of	   these	   databases	   is	   crowd-­‐sourced,	   i.e.,	   the	   companies	   themselves	   provide	   the	  
information.	  As	  a	  result,	  they	  are	  fairly	   incomplete	  (not	  all	  companies	  are	  there,	  not	  all	  data	  of	  a	  given	  
company	  is	  there,	  etc.).	  	  
2.  From	  “Silicon	  Times”	  magazine[5].	  I	  found	  a	  few	  free	  numbers	  online	  of	  a	  publication	  that	  tracks	  start-­‐
ups	   in	   the	   semiconductor	   and	   telecom	   industries.	   This	   was	   extremely	   useful	   as	   it	   allowed	   me	   to	  
uncover	  many	  names	  of	  failed	  companies.	  
3.  Using	   “Wayback	   machine”[6],	   a	   web	   archive	   that	   allowed	   me	   to	   dial	   back	   in	   time	   and	   view	   pages	   of	  
companies	  I	  was	  interested	  in.	  
4.  Using	  results	  of	  various	  other	  internet	  searches.	  

	  
3.	  Data	  Analysis	  
Before	  proceeding	  to	  construct	  a	  model	   I	  took	  a	   look	  at	  the	  data.	   I	  define	  success	  of	  a	  company	  (the	  “ones”)	  as	  
a	   return	  over	  5	   for	  a	   series	  A	   investor	   (27	   successes	  out	  of	  115	  data).	   It	  assumes	   that	   series	  A	   investment	  buys	  
30%	   of	   the	   company	   and	   that	   that	   ownership	   gets	   diluted	   30%	   by	   a	   liquidity	   event.	   Exact	   numbers	   on	   internal	  
round	   valuations	   are	   practically	   impossible	   to	   get	   so	   we	   have	   to	   make	   this	   estimate.	   This	   would	   help	   an	  
investor	   decide	   whether	   he	   should	   invest	   in	   the	   series	   A	   of	   a	   company.	   A	   series	   A	   return	   of	   5	   is	   a	   low	   return	  
rate	   over	   the	   typical	   7-­‐8	   years	   lifetime	   of	   a	   fund	   but	   if	   I	   increase	   it	   to	   10,	   we	   would	   have	   very	   few	   successes	  
(only	  17	  out	  of	  115	  data	  points).	  
	  
I	   was	   able	   to	   see	   some	   trends	   on	   the	   data	   that	   allowed	   me	   then	   to	   refine	   the	   features	   I	   collected.	   Figure	   1	  
shows	  a	  set	  of	  bar	  plots	  analyzing	  success	  factors.	  	  
	  

• 

• 

• 

• 
• 

• 

Subplot	   (1,1)	   shows	   successes	   versus	   the	   quality	   of	   the	   CEO	   at	   time	   of	   liquidity.	   Quality	   is	   defined	   as	  
from	  a	  top	  school.	  	  
the	  sum	  of	  the	  following	  features:	  CEO	  is	  founder,	  CEO	  holds	  a	  graduate	  technical	  degree	  and	  CEO	  was	  
at	  a	  startup	  before.	  
Subplot(1,2)	  shows	  successes	  versus	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  CTO/VP	  Engineering	  at	  time	  of	  liquidity.	  Quality	  
is	  defined	  as	  the	  sum	  of	  the	  following	  features:	  CTO	   is	  founder,	  CTO	  holds	  a	  graduate	  technical	  degree	  
Subplot(2,1)	   shows	   successes	   versus	   the	   number	   of	   founders	   occupying	   either	   the	   CTO	   or	   the	   CEO	  
position	  at	  the	  time	  of	  exit.	  Obviously	  having	  the	  founders	  remain	  at	  the	  company	  is	  critical.	  	  
Subplot(2,2)	  shows	  success	  versus	  combined	  CEO	  and	  CTO	  quality.	  
Subplot(3,1)	   shows	   successes	   versus	   qualities	   of	   CEO	   and	   CTO	   known	   at	   the	   time	   of	   funding	  
(education).	  
Subplot(3,2)	   shows	   successes	   versus	   the	   number	   of	   founders.	   It	   appears	   that	   one	   founder	   only	   is	   not	  
as	   desirable	   (perhaps	   suggesting	   that	   one	   needs	   support	   starting	   a	   company).	   Also	   three	   founders	   is	  
not	  ideal	  (perhaps	  suggesting	  odd	  team	  dynamics	  are	  not	  desirable).	  
	  

Figure	  1.	  	  Bar	  plots	  analyzing	  different	  success	  factors.	  Red	  indicates	  success,	  blue	  failure.	  

	  
I	  uncovered	  other	  interesting	  data	  relations	  such	  as	  low	  spending	  rate	  is	  desirable,	  smaller	  number	  of	  investors	  
is	  desirable	  etc.	  I	  used	  several	  x/y	  plots	  to	  see	  if	  data	  was	  separable	  in	  any	  features.	  However,	  the	  data	  does	  
not	  seem	  separable	  at	  first	  sight	  so	  it	  was	  hard	  to	  extract	  any	  information	  from	  that.	  

4.	  Model	  	  
	  
I	   built	   a	   logistic	   regression	   model	   that	   classifies	   data	   into	   success/failures	   (whether	   a	   return	   produces	   a	  

significant	   return).	   Due	   to	   the	   space	   limitation,	   I	   am	   not	   showing	   other	   experiments	   such	   as	   the	   return	   for	   a	  
later	  investor.	  
	  
I	   trained	   the	   model	   with	   80%	   of	   the	   data	   and	   I	   measured	   the	   performance	   on	   100%	   of	   the	   data	   using	   the	  
feature	   set	   in	   Table	   2.	   I	   used	   cross-­‐validation	   on	   different	   80%	   subsets	   of	   the	   data	   and	   selected	   the	   one	   that	  
provided	   the	   best	   test	   error.	   I	   tried	   several	   of	   the	   features	   combination	   by	   adding	   features	   one	   at	   a	   time	   and	  
understanding	  the	  impact	  on	  the	  overall	  model	  error.	  Also	  based	  on	  some	  of	  my	  initial	  results,	  I	  retook	  some	  of	  
the	  data	  (collected	  more	  info	  on	  CEO	  and	  CTO	  as	  well	  as	  the	  number	  of	  founders).	  
	  

-­‐1.501	  
Constant	  term	  
x0	  
3.227	  
Spending	  rate/mean(spending	  rate)	  
x1	  
-­‐0.538	  
Founding	  date	  -­‐1999	  
x2	  
1.218	  
Quality	  of	  CEO	  and	  CTO	  at	  funding	  
x3	  
-­‐0.189	  
Series	  A	  investment	  amount	  
x4	  
1.508	  
Number	  of	  founders	  
x5	  
-­‐2.687	  
Number	  of	  founders	  is	  even	  
X6	  
Table	  1.	  Logistic	  regression	  model	  parameters	  for	  a	  series	  A	  investor.	  Note	  that	  spending	  rate	  is	  an	  estimate	  
based	  on	  plan	  and	  may	  not	  be	  accurately	  known	  at	  time	  of	  funding.	  

	  
The	  test	  error	  was	  as	  follows	  for	  a	  logistic	  regression	  and	  SVM	  are	  shown	  in	  Table	  2.	  
	  

Logistic	  
	  
(20/27)	  74%	  
Success	  Guessed	  Correctly	  
(7/27)	  26%	  
Success	  Guessed	  Incorrectly	  
(77/88)	  88%	  
Failure	  guessed	  correctly	  
(11/88)	  12%	  
Failure	  guessed	  incorrectly	  
(97/115)	  84%	  
Total	  guessed	  correctly	  
Total	  guessed	  incorrectly	  
(18/115)	  16%	  
Table	  2.	  Quality	  of	  model	  for	  series	  A	  investor	  

SVM	  
(20/27)	  74%	  
(7/27)	  26%	  
(80/88)	  90%	  
(8/88)	  10%	  
(100/115)	  87%	  
(15/115)	  13%	  

	  
	  
The	   model	   suffers	   of	   high	   bias	   and	   more	   features	   are	   needed	   to	   generate	   lower	   error	   model.	   Unfortunately,	  
the	  time	  involved	  in	  collecting	  these	  features	  is	  large	  and	  I	  was	  not	  able	  to	  collect	  more	  information.	  	  
	  
I	  also	  created	  a	   regression	  model	   for	   the	  ROI	  as	   function	  of	   the	  variables	   in	  Table	  1.	   	   I	  obtained	  a	   large	   residual	  
when	   I	   fit	   the	   ROI	   number	   directly.	   Based	   on	   the	   residuals	   I	   obtained,	   I	   realized	   that	   if	   I	   fit	   the	   ROI^α,	   where	  
0<α<1,	   I	   would	   obtain	   a	   better	   fit.	   With	   a	   simple	   optimization	   loop,	   I	   found	   that	   α=0.4	   gave	   me	   the	   most-­‐
normal	   like	   residuals.	   I	  made	   a	   QQ-­‐plot	   of	   the	   residuals	   in	   Figure	   2.	   As	   one	   can	   see,	   residuals	   follow	   a	   normal	  
distribution	  quite	  well.	  The	  model	  I	  obtained	  is:	  
	  
ROI 0.4 = 0.85 + 1.214 x1 − 0.106 x 2 + 0.24 x 3 − 0.008 x 4 − 0.047 x 5 − 0.267 x 6 	  

	  
I	  run	  out	  of	  space	  to	  show	  the	  model	  for	  a	  later	  stage	  investor	  but	  the	  process	  is	  similar	  (just	  additional	  features	  
such	  as	  series	  B	  amount,	  time	  between	  A	  and	  B	  rounds).	  In	  any	  case,	  the	  series	  A	  decision	  is	  the	  most	  difficult	  
(less	  features	  available).	  
€ 
	  
	  
	  

	  

Figure	  3.	  QQ-­‐plot	  for	  residuals	  of	  linear	  regression	  of	  ROI0.4	  

	  

5.	  Conclusions	  and	  Future	  Work	  
	  
It	  is	  surprising	  that	  such	  a	  simple	  model	  can	  guess	  failures	  correctly	  in	  88%	  of	  the	  cases	  and	  successes	  in	  74%	  of	  
the	  cases.	  This	   is	  without	   taking	   into	  consideration	  any	  market	   factors	   such	  as	  whether	   the	  company	  has	  a	  key	  
technology,	   differentiated	   products,	   revenue,	   number	   of	   employees,	   competitors,	   good	   macro-­‐economic	  
conditions	   etc.	   	   I	   suspect	   that	   taking	   this	   later	   features	   into	   account	   would	   greatly	   improve	   the	   model	   error.	  
The	  success	  rate	  of	  a	  venture	  capitalist	  is	  very	  low,	  only	  23%	  (27/115).	  I	  believe	  VC	  robot	  could	  help	  assist	  bring	  
that	  rate	  up.	  
	  
The	  model	   still	  has	  high	  bias	   and	  more	   features	   are	  needed	   to	   achieve	  better	  modeling	   results.	   	   I	  plan	   to	  work	  
on	   this.	   Additionally	   I	   plan	   to	   estimate	   revenue	   stage	   at	   the	   time	   of	   financing.	   This	   will	   help	   with	   the	   model	  
level	  accuracy	  for	  a	  late	  stage	  investor.	  
	  
One	   of	   the	   conclusions	   from	   simply	   collecting	   the	   data	   is	   that	   if	   the	   initial	   founder	   CEO	   is	   still	   the	   CEO	   at	   the	  
time	   of	   a	   liquidity	   event,	   the	   chances	   of	   success	   are	  much	   higher.	   As	   a	   result	   the	  most	   important	   question	   an	  
investor	   must	   ask	   himself	   is	   whether	   the	   founder	   can	   remain	   CEO.	   	   To	   assist	   with	   this,	   I	   plan	   to	   continue	   to	  
gather	   additional	   features	   that	   would	   allow	   to	   build	   a	   simple	   model	   to	   predict	   whether	   a	   founding	   CEO	   can	  
remain	  CEO.	   I	  plan	  to	  gather	   features	  that	  are	  relate	  to	  the	  characteristics	  of	  the	  CEO	   (education,	  work	  history,	  
relation	  to	  founding	  team,	  etc).	  	  
	  
I	   have	   just	   scratched	   the	   surface	   of	   this	   exciting	   project.	   However	   it	   is	   exciting	   and	   I	   have	   found	  many	   people	  
interested	  in	  continuing	  the	  work.	  

6.	  References	  
	  
[1]	  VentureSource	  by	  Dow	  Jones	  VentureOne,	  http://www.venturesource.com/ 
[2]	  Crunchbase	  by	  Techcrunch	  (now	  AOL),	  http://www.crunchbase.com/ 
[3]	  Venturebeat,	  http://venturebeat.com/	  
[4]	  SiliconTaps,	  by	  SocalTech	  LLC,	  http://www.silicontap.com/	  
[5]	  “Silicon	  Times”	  by	  Pinestream	  Communications	  http://www.pinestream.com/	  
[6]	  “Wayback	  Machine”,	  http://www.archive.org/web/web.php/	  

