A machine learning approach to address the issue of false positives and false 
negatives in active structural health monitoring (SHM) 
Kranthi Kode, Fatih Sunor & Surajit Roy 

 

December 12, 2010 
 

Each  ‘smart  layer’  has  four  PZT  transducers, 
which can act as both actuators and sensors. The 
signals  are  generated  in  a  pulse-echo  mode 
where  one  ‘smart  layer’  sends  the  excitation 
pulse  while  the  other  one  records  the  received 
waveform.  The  basic  experimental  setup  for 
static  loading  and  the  test  coupon  with  attached 
‘smart layers’ are shown in Fig. 1.  
 

Abstract: 
 
This  study  proposes  distinct  new  features  in  the  PZT  sensor  signals  to  separate  the  effects  of  damage  (edge 
cracks)  and  non-damage  (temperature  and  applied  loads)  conditions  in  the  metallic  structures.  Experiments 
conducted  on  thin  rectangular  aluminum  specimens  show  that  the  specific  combination  of  signal  feature  and 
machine  learning  algorithm  can  reduce  the  false  negatives  to  less  than  12%,  while  the  false  positives  lie  well 
within  30%.  The  proposed  methodology  is  also  tested  for  scalability  by  applying  the  learning  algorithm  to 
different geometry and different damage type. 
 
Introduction:  
 
Active  structural  health  monitoring 
(SHM) 
employs  the  concept  of  anomaly  detection  in  a 
structure based on the propagation of lamb waves. 
These  waves  are  generated  using  the  principle  of 
piezoelectricity 
by 
piezoceramic 
(PZT) 
transducers.  The  PZT  sensor  signals,  representing 
the  propagation  of  lamb  waves,  may  undergo 
change  in  their  characteristics  (phase,  amplitude 
or spectral content) while propagating  through  the 
structure.  These  changes  can  either  be  caused  by 
intrinsic  factors  such  as  fatigue  cracks,  surface 
corrosion,  delaminations  or  extrinsic  factors  such 
as changes  in environmental  temperature, changes 
in  loading  and  boundary  conditions.  The  key 
challenge in the SHM is to address the problem of 
false-positives,  wherein  the  system  mistakenly 
attributes  the  changes  in  the  operational  and 
environmental  conditions  to  the  presence  of 
defects  inside  the  material.  The  objective  of  this 
study  is  to  develop  a  classification  model  based 
on  the machine  learning  approach  that  can  reduce 
the  problem  of  false  positives  and  false  negatives 
to a considerable extent. 
 
Experimental Setup:  
 
In 
the 
the  signals  representing 
this  study, 
propagation  of  lamb  waves  in  a  structure  are 
generated  and  collected  from  two  separate  ‘smart 
layers’ attached on the surface of the test coupons. 

  
 
The  test  coupons  are  thin  rectangular  aluminum 
(‘Al  6065  alloy’)  plates  having  dimensions  as 
14”x4.5”x0.078”.  The  present  study  is  carried 
out with  ‘Burst3’  (3-peaks Gaussian  tone-burst) 
signal  type  at  an  actuation  frequency  of  250 
kHz.  The  choice  of  signal  parameters 
is 
governed  by  the  clear  resolution  of  the  signal  in 
both  the  time  and  frequency  domain. The  effect 

(c) 

(d) 

Figure  1:  (a)  Test  coupon  subjected  to  loading  in 
MTS  machine  (b)  Data  acquisition  System  (c) 
Coupon  with  induced  damage  (1½”  straight  edge 
crack) at the center and (d) 4-PZT sensor strip ‘smart 
layer’ attached to the test coupon 

 

(a) 

(b) 

 

1 

of  temperature,  load  and  damage  on  one  of  the 
sensor signals is shown in fig. 2. 
 

(a) 

Baseline 
Temp. @ 60° C 

(a) 

(b) 

(b) 

Baseline 
Load @ 4kips 

(c) 

Baseline 
Damage: 0.5” crack 

 

 

time (units) 

 
Figure  2:  Effect  of  (a)  Temperature,  (b)  Load  and  (c) 
Damage  on  a  specific  PZT  sensor  signal.  The  box  in  figure 
(c)  highlights  the  localized  changes  in  the  signal  in  the  time 
domain whereas  for  figures  (a) and  (b)  the changes w.r.t  the 
baseline signal can be observed in the entire time domain.  
 
The PZT sensor signals are collected from  the  test 
coupons 
at 
different 
levels 
of 
elevated 
temperatures,  static  loads  and  induced  damages. 
The  temperature  data  ranging  from  30ºC  to  90ºC 
is  collected 
in  a  controlled  environmental 
chamber.  The  static  load  data  is  collected  by 
loading  the  test  coupons  in  MTS  machine  and 
recording  the  data  at  different  load  levels.  The 
experiments  are  repeated  thrice  for  consistency  in 
data  collection.  The  damage  conditions  are 
simulated  by  introducing  edge  cracks  of  varying 
lengths  on  the  coupons  at  different  locations.  The 
training data for the damage condition is collected 
from the coupons with straight edged cracks at the 
center  of 
the  specimen.  The  damage  data 
corresponding  to  the  test  set  is  obtained  from 
coupon  with  cracks  starting  at  different  location 
and  propagating  along  different  direction  as 
shown in fig. 3. 

 

2 

 
Figure  3:  (a)  Coupon  layout:  Training  set,  straight  edge 
cracks  starting  at  the  center;  (b)  Coupon  layout:  Test  set, 
cracks  starting at different  location and propagating along 
different direction 
 
Methodology: 
 
The  data  collected  at  elevated  temperatures  and 
at  different  load  levels  are  classified  as  ‘non-
damaged’  data  whereas  the  rest  of  the  signals 
are  considered  as  ‘damaged  data’.  The  training 
set  has  560  ‘non-damaged’  and  128  ‘damaged 
signals’  whereas  the  test  set  has  208  ‘non-
damaged’  and  128  ‘damaged’  signals.  New  and 
unique  features  from 
the  signal  data  are 
identified  based  on  the  hypothesis  that  damaged 
conditions  will  cause  only  localized  changes  in 
the  signal  in  time  domain  and  vice-versa  for 
non-damaged  conditions.  The  performance 
measures  for  each  of  these  features  are  studied 
with  different  classification  algorithms  to  select 
only  a  few  set  of  features.  This  subset  of 
features  along  with 
the  best  classification 
algorithms  are  finally  tested  on  new  geometry 
and  new  damage  type  for  the  scalability  and 
baseline transfer approach.  
 
Feature Selection: 
 
The  following  sets  of  features  are  identified 
based on the aforementioned hypothesis.  
 
Feature  I)  &  II)  Signal  Scatter  Amplitudes: 
The  feature  type  I  and  type  II  consists  of  the 
whole  and  sub-section  of  scatter  signals 
respectively.  Scatter  signal  is  the  difference 
between  the  recorded  sensor  signals  under 
different  experimental  conditions  and 
the 
baseline  sensor  signals,  representing  the  pristine 
and undamaged state of the structure. 
 

Feature Type III), IV), V), VI) & VII) Uniformly 
Discretized  Signal  Vector:  The  signal  data  is 
discretized  into  uniformly  spaced  intervals  (bins) 
in  the  time  domain.  Each  bin  is  assigned  with  a 
characteristic number based on the behavior of the 
signal  at  different  time  intervals.  Feature  type  III 
is  the  norm  of  the  scatter  signal  within  each  bin. 
Feature  type  IV  is  the  maximum  of  peak  to  peak 
amplitude  difference  between  the  sensor  signals, 
collected at different experimental conditions, and 
the corresponding baseline signals within each bin 
(shown  in  fig.  4). Feature  type V  is  the maximum 
phase  shift  between  the  peaks  of  the  sensor 
signals  and  the  corresponding  baseline  signals 
within each bin respectively. 
   
Baseline 
Signal at different 
experimental conditions 

Feature  Type  VIII)  Singular  values  of  STFT 
magnitudes ‘time-frequency matrix’: The  time-
frequency  analysis  of  the  scatter  signal  for  a 
given  actuator-sensor  pair  is  carried  out  using 
the  short-time  Fourier  transformation.  It  is 
hypothesized  that  the  changes  in  the  spectral 
content  of  the  signal  over  the  time  may  help  in 
separating out the damage characteristics hidden 
in 
non-damage 
the 
from 
signal 
the 
characteristics.  The  spectral  content  of  the 
scatter  signal,  STFT  magnitude, 
is 
then 
decomposed using singular value decomposition 
(SVD)  to  obtain  its  lower  rank  approximation. 
Fig.  6  represents  the  percentage  errors  in 
classifying  damage  data  in  the  test  set  with 
different  number  of  singular  values  as  the 
classifying feature. 

 
Figure  4:  Peak  to  peak  amplitude  change  and  phase  shift 
between the baseline signal and signals collected at different 
experimental conditions 
 
Feature  type  VI  is  the  combination  of  feature 
types  IV  and  V  whereas  feature  type  VII  is  the 
combination of feature  type  IV and average of  the 
phase shifts  in each bin. Fig. 5 shows  the effect of 
changing  the  number  of  bins  on  the  prediction  of 
‘false negatives’ corresponding to the test set data. 
The  optimal  number  of  bins  considered  in  this 
study is ‘25’ based on the sensitivity analysis. 
 

  
Figure  5:  Plot  of %  error  in  classifying  damage  data  (‘false 
negatives’)  in  the  test  set  vs.  number  of  bins  of  the  signal 
vector.  

 

3 

 
Figure  6:  Plot  of  %  error  in  classifying  damage  data 
(‘false  negatives’)  in  the  test  set  vs.  number  of  singular 
values of STFT magnitude of the scatter signal vector. 
 
Feature  type  VIII  is  the  first  three  singular 
values  of  the  spectral  content  of  the  scatter 
signal.  The  later  singular  values  are  relatively 
smaller  and  hence  have  lower  significance  for 
learning models as is shown in fig. 6. 
 
Results: 
 
Fig.  7  shows  the  plot  of  percentage  errors  in 
classifying  damage  vs.  non-damage  signals  in 
the  test  set  for  different  machine  learning 
algorithms. The three different machine learning 
algorithms  used  in  this  study  are  ‘Bayesian 
Logistic  Regression’ 
‘Gaussian 
(BLR), 
Discriminant  Analysis’  (GDA  with  different 
mean  and  covariance  for  the  damage  and  non-
damage  sets)  and  ‘Support  Vector  Machines’ 
(SVM  with  linear  regularized  kernel).  The 
parameters  used  in  the  ‘BLR’  and  ‘SVM’  are 

chosen  such  that  their  small  variation  does  not 
affect the output of these algorithms. 
 
(a) 

False Negatives  

False Positives  

 

 

(b) 

 
(c) 

Figure  7:  Plot  of %  errors  in  classifying  the  damage  signals 
for  test  set  data  with  different  classification  algorithms:  (a) 
Support  vector  machines  (linear  regularized  kernel),  (b) 
GDA and (c) Bayesian Logistic Regression. 
 
It can be seen from fig. 7 that the percentage error 
in  classifying 
the  non  damage  data  (false-
positives)  is  within  25%  for  all  the  features  and 
for  all  the  algorithms.  The  percentage  errors  in 
classifying 
the 
damaged 
signals 
(‘false-
negatives’)  are  extremely  high  for  almost  all  the 
features.  It  needs  to  be  mentioned  here  that  ‘false 
negatives’  should  be  as  low  as  possible  for  the 
practical  viability  of  any  classification  algorithm. 

 

feature  and 
specific 
there  are 
However 
algorithm  combinations  where 
‘false 
the 
negatives’  are  at  par  or  lower  than  the  ‘false 
positives’. The feature ‘type V’ (max phase shift 
(25  bins))  shows  greater  accuracy  in  classifying 
the  damage  vs.  non-damage  data  for  all  the 
algorithms  as  compared 
to  other  features. 
Physically  this  behavior  can  be  attributed  to  the 
type  of  damage  we  are  observing  in  our  train 
and test data. The edge cracks result in the phase 
delay  of  the  damage  signals  occurring  only  at 
specific  time of  interest as shown  in fig. 2c. The 
effect  of  discretizing  the  time  and  considering 
the  maximum  of  the  phase  shifts  in  each  bin  as 
the  feature  vector  enhances  the  probability  of 
classifying 
type  of  damage  data. 
this 
Additionally  one  more  feature,  type  VIII,  is 
identified  which  works  well  with  ‘GDA’.  This 
feature  (first  three  singular  values  of  STFT) 
achieves  classification  between  damage  and 
non-damage signals within an error of 22%.  
 
Figs.  8  (a) &  8  (b)  shows  the  ‘Precision-Recall’ 
curves  for  feature  ‘type V’  and  ‘type VIII’ with 
different 
combination 
of 
classification 
algorithms.  A  comparison  of  area  under  the 
precision-recall curves  for different  features  and 
different algorithms is also shown in fig. 8 (c). It 
can  be  inferred  from  figs.  7  and  8  that  the  best 
feature 
and 
classification 
algorithm 
combinations  are  i) Model  ‘A’:  feature  ‘type V’ 
(max.  phase  shift  (25  bins)) with  ‘SVM’  and  ii) 
Model  ‘B’:  feature  ‘type  VIII’  (first  3  singular 
values of STFT) with ‘GDA’.  
 
(a) 

 

 

 

4 

 

(b) 

 
(c) 

the  wave 
the  direct  path  of 
obstructing 
propagation  from  actuators  to  sensors.  The 
prominent  effect  of 
this  damage 
type 
is 
reduction  in  signal  amplitudes  without  having 
significant  contribution  to  the  localized  phase 
changes in the sensor signals.   

 

  
Figure 9: Test Case (a), 
 
Classification of Temperature 
 
data @ 60° C - Rectangular 
 
Plate 18”x12”x.078” 
 
Table  1:  Summary  of  performance  of  learning  model  ‘A’ 
and model ‘B’ on training and test sets 

                         
Figure 9: Test Case (b), 
Classification of new 
damage type - Drilled hole 
at the center 

  

Model 'A' (% error)  Model 'B' (% error) 
False 
False 
False 
False 
Positives 
Negatives 
Positives 
Negatives 

 

  
 
Figure  8:  (a)  Precision-Recall  curve  for  feature  ‘type  V’ 
(max.  phase  shift  (25  bins),  (b)  Precision-Recall  curve  for 
feature  ‘type VIII’  (first  3  singular  values  of  STFT)  and  (c) 
Area  under  the  Precision-Recall  curve  for  different  features 
and different classification algorithms 
 
Testing Scalability: 
 
Table  1  summarizes  the  performance  of  best 
feature  and  algorithm  combinations  for  different 
test  cases.  The  study  thus  far  has  resulted  in 
classification models that can classify between the 
damaged and non-damaged signals within an error 
bound  of  30%  in  both  the  training  and  test  set 
data.  The  model  is  then  tested  for  scalability, 
wherein  the  signals  collected  on  new  geometry 
and  new  damage  type,  as  shown  in  fig.  9,  are 
classified  as  either  damaged  or  non-damaged. 
Surprisingly  the  learning  model  ‘B’  tracks  both 
the  damaged  and  non-damaged  signals  quite 
accurately.  The  learning  model  ‘A’  however  does 
not  work  with  new  damage  type  indicating  that 
this  feature  is  sensitive  to  the  type  of  damages. 
Physically  the  drilled  hole  at  the  center  is 

 

--- 

0 

0 

--- 

0 

9.375 

--- 

75 

--- 

8.5938 

5.4688 

21.1538 

11.7188 

8.6538 

2.6786 

29.4643 

 
Training Set 
 
Test Set 
 Test Case a.) 
New Geometry with 
temp. data only 
 Test Case b.) 
New Damage type 
 
Conclusions: 
 
The  present  study  identifies  best  feature  and 
learning  algorithm  combinations  to  classify  the 
PZT  sensor  signals  as  ‘damaged’  or  ‘non-
damaged’  for  metallic  structures.  The  damage 
represented  by  edge  cracks  in  metals  can  be 
classified with  very  high  accuracy  (low  test  and 
training 
set 
errors), 
however 
further 
investigation  is  required  to  make  this  method 
work for different type of damages. 
 
References: 
 

1.)  Andrew Ng., CS229 Class Notes, 2010. 

2.)  Keith Worden and Graeme Manson, The application 
of  machine  learning  to  structural  health  monitoring, 
Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 2007 365, 515-537.    

 

5 

