Predicting Market Fluctuations via Machine Learning

Michael Lim,Yong Su

December 9, 2010

Abstract

Much work has been done in stock market prediction. In this pro ject we predict a
1% swing (either direction) in the next day’s closing price of S&P 500 from historical
data. We implement our model with support vector machines.
We capture market sensation with three features, namely the volume, the daily mo-
mentum indicator and the Chicago Board Options Exchange Market Volatility Index.
Our model does not work well enough to be of practical use.

1

Introduction

We apply machine learning algorithms to predict the magnitude of percentage swings in
Standard & Poor’s (S&P) 500 index of large publicly traded companies. Historically, large
swings have occurred during periods of high volatility and unusually large trading volumes
[1]. If the past is any guide to the future, one might reasonably hope to predict price move-
ments in the near future based on current and past observations of market volatility and
trading volume, and hence proﬁt from it by placing appropriate trades.

We thus have a binary classiﬁcation problem: on day D, given volatility and volume data
for the past d days (including day D), will the market move by 1% or more? This is an
example of a supervised learning problem. We are given training examples (historical data),
and we would like to predict the next day’s outcome. There is a wide variety of machine
learning algorithms to tackle such tasks[2], and we employ a support vector machine (SVM)
in this paper.
We propose to capture volatility, trading volume, and momentum with three datasets.
We will use the VIX (VIX) as a proxy for market volatility, daily closing volume (VOL), and
the Commodity Research Bureau’s Stock Market Momentum Indicator (MI). We also have
the percentage change in the S&P index for each day in this period (PC).

1. Volume reﬂects the buying and selling of shares and so is an important factor to analyze
market activity. Here we scale it so it is a number between 0 and 1.

1

2. Daily Momentum Indicator Published by the Commodity Research Bureau, the daily
momentum indicator is quoted as a value in between 0 and 1 and analyzes the price
strength of the S&P 500 stocks. Momentum indicators generally work because empiri-
cal studies have shown that [3] stock return is positively autocorrelated, so its precious
path can be used to predict future returns. Roughly, MI measures the moving 25-day
average of the proportion of stocks on the S&P 500 that are moving up.

3. Chicago Board Options Exchange Market Volatility Index (VIX)

Also known as the fear index, VIX is a measure of the implied volatility of S&P 500
index call and put options. VIX reﬂects the market expectation of how volatile S&P
500 might be over the next 30 days. VIX is quoted as a percentage, for instance, if
VIX is 10, it means that one expects S&P 500 index to move up or down 10%√
over the
12
next 30 days.

2 Data

We took VIX, VOL, and MI data (values at market close) for the period 16 Jan 1992 - 5
Nov 2010 (roughly 19 years). We normalized VOL to lie in [0, 1], simply by dividing VOL
by its maximum value.
We begin by performing some exploratory data analysis, primarily to search for stable
statistical relationships between PC and each of the three datasets.

Figure 1: Histogram of PC vs VIX

Figure 1 shows the relationship between PC and VIX, and was obtained with a moving
window of size d = 10 days. In particular, VIX values (x-axis) for the past 10 days were

2

averaged, and plotted against the next day’s PC (y-axis). The colors indicate the density of
the points. If high volatility is a good predictor of large price swings, one would expect a
high density region (red) in the upper right region of the plot. But we see no such trend.

Figure 2: Histogram of PC vs VOL

The same analysis on VOL and MI produced Figure 2 and Figure 3. Once again, keep
in mind that, ideally, we would like a high density region in the upper right region.

Figure 3: Histogram of PC vs MI

3

We see that neither VOL nor MI produce the desired trend.

3 Method

We ﬁxed P C = 1%, and performed a 70-30 split on our dataset to obtain a training set
(ﬁrst 3319 days), and test set (last 1422 days). With historical period d = 10, this gives
approximately 320 training examples, and 130 test examples. We performed cross validation
and the area under precision-recall curves to ﬁnd optimal values for our SVM, which turned
out to be C = 8192, σ = 1.2207 × 10−4 . The precision-recall curve for our optimized SVM is
given in Figure 4.

Figure 4: Precision-Recall

Next, we plotted the ROC curve. Each datapoint corresponds to a choice of d for the
historical period.

4

Figure 5: ROC Curve

To decide how many days of historical data is optimal, we make use of the ROC curve.
For simplicity, assume that the proﬁt from a true positive equals the opportunity cost arising
from a false positive. We then ﬁnd the portion of the ROC curve that is tangent to the 45
degree line. Thus, we ﬁt a quadratic polynomial to the curve, and take the datapoint that
is closest to the required tangent. This gave us d = 12 days.

4 Conclusion
With P C = 1%, d = 12, C = 8192, and σ = 1.2207 × 10−4 , we obtained a precision of
0.5374, and recall of 0.6394 on the test set. This is disappointing performance, and more
work needs to be done. Our timescale might be too coarse (days), and one might look into
using intraday values instead. Alternatively, one might construct better features.

5 Bibliography

1. Saro j Kaushik and Naman Singhal, Pattern Prediction in Stock Market, AI 2009:
Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2009

2. Paul D. Yoo, Maria H. Kim and Tony Jan, Machine Learning Techniques and Use of
Event Information for Stock Market Prediction: A Survey and Evaluation, 2005

3. Eugene F. Fama and Kenneth R. French, Dividend yields and expected stock returns,
Journal of Financial Economics, Vol 22, Issue 1, October 1988.

5

