Classifying fMRI images using sparse coding:
a pro ject for CS229

Christopher Archibald
cja@stanford.ed

Evan Millar
emillar@stanford.edu

December 15, 2006

1 Introduction

Recent work has been done by Ra jat Raina and other researchers at Stanford
in applying sparse coding techniques to various classiﬁcation problems. In
this pro ject we follow that tradition by applying sparse coding to the problem
of classifying fMRI images.
In particular, we try to classify fMRI images
based on what the sub ject was doing when the fMRI image was obtained.
The two classiﬁcation possibilities we consider are whether the sub ject was
looking at a sentence or looking at a picture.
Ra jat Raina provided direction and advise on sparse coding techniques,
as well as a code base for sparse coding and classiﬁcation. We acknowledge
him and thank him for his help.

1.1 FMRI images

FMRI (Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging), is a method of using mag-
netic resonance imaging to measure the change in blood ﬂow and oxygena-
tion of blood in the brain. FMRI data is typically noisy and very high-
dimensional. It is also diﬃcult to obtain large amounts of data from single
sub jects. FMRI data must be pre-processed in a fairly signiﬁcant way so
that the resulting data is usable.
For our pro ject, we started with the data obtained in the Star/Plus fMRI
pro ject at Carnegie Mellon. This data has already been preprocessed and
arranged in a manner that makes dealing with it more practical. Each patient
has 1280 ”snapshots”. Half of those snapshots the patient is looking at
a sentence, and the other half the patient is looking at an image. Each

1

Figure 1: Sample fMRI images

snapshot contains eight two-dimensional images, each of which is a cross
section or ”slice” at a certain depth in the brain.

1.2 Sparse coding

Sparse coding is a technique for representing information that has been pos-
tulated to occur in the V1 portion of the visual cortex. Sparse coding al-
gorithms learn bases that can be linearly combined to reconstruct the input
data. Sparse coding algorithms speciﬁcally try to come up with a set of bases
that will allow for accurate reconstruction of the input with as few images
as possible.
Given input images x(i) , the sparse coding algorithm ﬁnds activations a(i)
||x(i) − X
X
and bases b to minimize equation ??.
i
j

j bj ||2
2 + β ||a||1
a(i)

min
b,a

(1)

Our hope in applying sparse coding to fMRI data is to be able to identify
regions in the brain that have correlated activity, much like ROIs (Regions of
Interest) used in typical fMRI data analysis. ROIs must be hand-identiﬁed
by someone with neuroscience knowledge, who can analyze the brain and
designate the regions of interest as deﬁned by speciﬁc anatomical landmarks.
Through sparse coding, our hope was to achieve comparable performance
without brain-speciﬁc knowledge.

2 Experiment

Originally we wanted to be able to train bases and a classiﬁer that worked
across multiple sub jects. Our goal was to be able to train on data from a
group of sub jects, and then test on a new sub ject’s data. However the shape
and size of the brain varied substantially between sub jects. We realized that

2

in order to make this work we had to somehow normalize the fMRI data
across sub jects.
We decided to translate and scale each fMRI slice to a standard size
of 32x32 pixels. This helped to line up the slices so that the brain size
and shape across patients had more congruency. However upon calculating
bases and training classiﬁers with this normalized data, we discovered that
this data normalization was not suﬃcient to be able to compare data across
sub jects eﬀectively. After doing more research into how this issue is dealt
with in past studies, we found that this is actually a signiﬁcant problem
in machine learning of fMRI data. The most common solution is to use
manually labeled regions of interest and then compare those regions across
sub jects. We decided that for the scope of this pro ject we would stick with
single sub ject bases and classiﬁers. This in itself is a hard problem, and one
that has not been perfected as yet. We felt that this was still a signiﬁcant
topic to tackle, and one that could perhaps be improved upon by sparse
coding techniques.
Once we decided to work to classify within a single sub ject, we tried
several test runs of the whole process on one sub ject, with variations in the
sparse coding and PCA parameters. We varied things like the PCA reduction
dimension, the β value, or sparseness penalty, in the sparse coding algorithm,
the number of bases learned, and the size of the test and training sets. From
the results of these varied experiments on a single sub ject we decided to
proceed with experiments involving the rest of the sub jects, reducing our
data to 400 dimension through PCA, using a β value of 1, and using 90%
of the data as training data and 10% as test. We then proceeded to run the
code with this setup on two other sub jects. We present the results in the
next section.

3 Results

Most of the sub jects data contained about 5000 voxels. Using PCA, we
reduced this data to 400 dimensional data. This reduction usually preserved
between 60% and 70% of the total variance of the original data. Figure ??
shows an original fMRI image and then that same image reduced to 400
dimensions and then converted back to its original dimensionality. This is
what we used to give us a feel for how the diﬀerent PCA reduced dimension
sizes were doing at preserving the original data.

3

Figure 2: Comparison of original fMRI image (left) with PCA-reduced image

3.1 Sparse coding results

The sparse coding algorithm learned 50 bases for each of our sub jects. The
sparsity penalty β was 1, and this gave us average activation activities around
7%, meaning each fMRI image was reconstructed using only about 7% of the
bases. With 50 bases learned, this means that on average we were using
between 3 and 4 bases to reconstruct a given image. An example of a recon-
struction that used only 2 bases is shown in ﬁgure ??.

= 0.1624∗

+0.0641∗

Figure 3: Reconstruction of fMRI image from bases 11 and 46

3.2 Classiﬁcation results

We ran our code on the fMRI data of 3 sub jects, and trained GDA classiﬁers
on 90% of the data and tested on the other 10%. As a baseline for compar-
ison we also trained classiﬁers on the raw voxel information after the PCA
dimension reduction. This is shown in the table under raw features. The
results of these experiments are shown in table ??.

4 Conclusions and future work

Results of our various experiments were varied and inconsistent. Some in-
dicated that sparse coding had a signiﬁcant impact on the accuracy of clas-
siﬁcation of fMRI images, while others showed that sparse coding struggled
to compete with use of raw voxel information to classify the images. Our
conclusions are that more work needs to be done determining just how much

4

Table 1: Classiﬁcation accuracies for GDA classiﬁers trained using raw and
sparse features

Training size Raw features Sparse features

Sub ject 4847

Sub ject 4820

Sub ject 5710

100
200
500
1152

100
200
500
1152

100
200
500
1152

0.727
0.742
0.773
0.859

0.570
0.617
0.672
0.789

0.656
0.703
0.688
0.852

0.711
0.727
0.766
0.766

0.570
0.672
0.703
0.672

0.578
0.578
0.594
0.562

sparse coding can impact fMRI classiﬁcation. The amount of time necessary
to complete a cycle of bases learning and classiﬁcation limited the number of
experiment we were able to complete. As it was, we completed a fair number
of experiments, but almost always with diﬀerent parameters involved.
In the future, we would like to continue with a more comprehensive eval-
uation of some of the techniques we have used in this pro ject. Speciﬁcally,
it would be very helpful to use some form of cross-validation to evaluate
the classiﬁers results on this data set. We plan also to vary the number
of bases we learn, and see what eﬀect this has on classiﬁcation ability. We
also would like to investigate the eﬀectiveness of sparse coding as applied
to time-sequences of fMRI images, as opposed to single time snapshots, as
we attempted in this pro ject. Bases learned on time-sequences might give
us more robust classiﬁcation possibilities and might contain new information
about the relationships of diﬀerent areas of the brain. We plan also to use
sparse coding to help classify fMRI images or sequences into more categories
than just two. This would be necessary in the Pittsburgh Brain Activity
Interpretation Competition (www.ebc.pitt.edu), which would also provide a
lot of data and opportunity to determine the eﬀectiveness of a sparse coding
approach. We are optimistic about the possibilities of sparse coding in the
future of fMRI interpretation.

5

