Image Processing of Wild Type and Mutant Bacterial Cells 
Sun-Hae Hong and Meng How Tan 

 
ABSTRACT 
 
Different  types  of  bacteria  have  different  cell  shapes.  In  particular,  Caulobacter 
 
crescentus  is  a  crescent-shaped  bacterium  that  undergoes  asymmetric  division  to  give  a 
motile  swarmer  cell  and  a  sessile  stalked  cell.  However,  when  some  genes  are  mutated, 
its  morphology  may  be  affected  in  a  variety  of  ways.  For  example,  the  bacterium  may 
grow  filamentous  or  become  rod-shaped.  Our  goal  was  to  write  a  program  that  could 
decide  whether  a  given  image  shows  wild  type  or  mutant  cells.  We  used  the  discrete 
cosine  transformation  (DCT)  and  its  principal  components  as  the  feature  space  to 
differentiate  between  wild  type  cells  and  mutant  cells  in  general.  We  found  that  the 
projection  vectors  of  abnormally  shaped  cells  to  those  of  wild  type  cells  had  different 
distributions.  We  also  used  locally  weighted  linear  regression  to  successfully  classify 
wild  type  crescent-shaped  cells  and  mutant  lemon-shaped  cells.  Future  work  includes 
extending  the  program  to  automatically  identify  protein  mislocalization  mutants  from 
both phase contrast and fluorescence images.  
 
INTRODUCTION 
  

 
Figure 1.  (A) A schematic of  the different stages of  the Caulobacter cell cycle  (adapted  from Skerker 
and Laub, 2004).  (B) The cell's appearance under the microscope over the course of the cell cycle. 
  

Caulobacter crescentus is an aquatic, non-pathogenic bacterium that has a distinct 
crescent shape. It serves as a model organism for studying both the prokaryotic cell cycle 
and how bacteria establish and maintain cellular asymmetry. As it progresses through the 
cell cycle, it elongates and pinches off in the middle to give two daughter cells - a smaller 
motile  swarmer  cell  and  a  larger  sessile  stalked  cell  (Figure  1A). Since  the  bacterium 

 

1

looks  different  under  the microscope  at  different  stage  of  the  cell  cycle  (Figure  1B),  we 
can use its morphology as a means for us to track its life progression.  
 
We  can  use  morphology  to  determine  if  the  cells  are  normal  or  abnormal.  Wild 
type Caulobacter cells have a stereotypical crescent shape and size  (Figure 2A).  In some 
mutants, cell  division  cannot  occur.  Instead,  they  grow  filamentous  and  look  abnormally 
long  (Figure  2B).  In  other  cases,  the  deletion  of  certain  genes  or  the  mislocalization  of 
certain  proteins  causes  polar  defects  (Figure  2C).  Furthermore,  when  intracellular 
structural proteins are disrupted, the cells can lose its crescent shape and look like lemons 
(Figure  2D).  Hence,  we  aimed  to  write  a  program,  based  on machine  learning,  that 
could take  in phase  contrast  images  and  tell us  if  the  image  contains wild  type or mutant 
cells. 
 

Figure 2. Cell morphology. 

 

 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
Pre-processing of Images 
 

Figure 3. How we obtain individual cells from a phase contrast image. 

 

 

2

 

We  pre-processeed  phase  contrast  images,  each  of  which  was  16-bit  and  of  size 
1000  by  1000,  to  obtain  segmented  cell  images  (Figure  3).  We  used  a  Matlab  built-in 
function called weiner2 for noise reduction. (We also tried the Canny edge detector, but it 
did not work very well on the input images.) Each image was segmented by thresholding. 
Cells were  copied  to  individual  boxes  and  oriented,  so  that  the  crescent  side of  each  cell 
faced  the  right  hand  side.  The  brightness  and  contrast  level  were  adjusted,  so  that  the 
maximum brightness was 1 and the background level was 0.  
 
Classification by principal components 
 

We  first  tried  to  use  Zernike  moments  to  represent  the  segmented  cell  images. 
Zernike  first  proposed  the  Zernike  polynomials  in  1934.  The  moment  formulation  
appeared  to  be  very  popular  for  image  analysis  and  was  able  to  outperform  several 
alternatives  in  terms  of  noise  resilience,  information  redundancy,  and  reconstruction 
capability (Teh and Chin, 1988.). However, we found  that computation of  the orthogonal 
Zernike moments was very slow. 
 
Instead,  we  used  the  2D  DCT  to  represent  our  segmented  cell  images.  Like  any 
Fourier-related  transform,  DCTs  express  a  function  or  a  signal  in  terms  of  a  sum  of 
sinusoids  with  different  frequencies  and  amplitudes  (Ahmed  et  al.,  1974).  The  DCT  is 
often used in signal and image processing, especially for lossy data compression, because 
it  has  a  strong  “energy  compaction”  property: most  of  the  signal  information  tends  to  be 
concentrated  in  a  few  low-frequency  components  of  the  DCT.  Indeed,  we  discarded  all 
the higher frequencies from the DCT to reduce the original matrix of size 101 by 101 to a 
50  by  50  matrix  (the  error  from  discarding  the  higher  frequencies  was  found  to  be 
insignificant).  Then  we  calculated  the  principal  components  (PCs)  of  the  feature  vector. 
Figure 4 shows  the first  three PCs. The first PC seemed  to be able  to capture progression 
along the cell cycle fairly well. 
 

Figure 4. The first three PCs of wild type cell images. 

 
 
We  projected  the  feature  vectors  of  both  wild  type  and  mutant  cells  to  the  first 
few principal vectors of wild type cells. The scatter plots of those projection vectors were 
different  between  wild  type  and  mutant  cells.  For  example,  the  distribution  of  ∆mreC 
cells  was  clearly  distinguishable  from  that  of  wild  type  cells  (Figure  5A).  Cells 
expressing  PleC-GFP  were  usually  shorter  than  wild  type,  thereby  resulting  in  a  larger 
first PC (Figure 5B). 

 

 

3

 

 

Figure 5. Scatter plots of the first two PCs for both wild type and mutant cells. 

 
 
 
However,  we  were  unable  to  use  these  principal  components  to  classify 
wild  type  and  mutant  cells  successfully.  Although  the  first  few  PCs  represented  the  cell 
shape  of wild  type  cells  quite well,  they  did  not  represent  different  types  of mutant  cells 
adequately, since the calculated PCs were optimized for expressing the cell shape of wild 
type  cells.  Figure  6  shows  that  the  residual  errors  of  the mutant  test  set  are much  bigger 
than those of the wild type test set.  
 

 

Figure 6. Histogram of residual errors. 

 
Classification by Locally Weighted Linear Regression 
 
 
We  decided  to  focus  on  classifying  wild  type  crescent-shaped  cells  and  mutant 
lemon-shaped cells. Clearly, the width distribution along the cell’s long axis was different 
between  the wild  type  case  and  the mutant  case  (Figure  7). This  formed  the  basis  of  our 
feature  vector,  which  consisted  of  width  measurements  at  20  positions  along  the  long 
axis. We also divided cells into two types – those that had started to pinch (swarmers and 
stalked cells) and those that were pinching (pre-divisional cells).  
 

 

4

 
Figure 7. How the cell width varies along the long axis for both wild type and mutant cells. 

 
We  used  locally weighted  linear  regression,  so  that  the  correct  choice  of  features 
 
became less critical. Specifically, we wanted to minimize  
(
)
2)(
∑
yw
x
T
i
i
i
, 
 
 
 
 
 
)(
)(
−
θ
i
where the w(i)’s were non-negative valued weights. We chose them to be  
(
)
2
⎛
⎞
x
x
i
)(
−
⎜
⎟
exp
⎜
⎟
2
2
τ
⎝
⎠
where τ was the bandwidth parameter.  
 
 

       (1) 

       (2) 

−

i
)(

w

=

 

 

, 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Figure 8. Size distributions of cresent-shaped and lemon-shaped cells. 

 

 

5

 
We  performed  hold-out  cross-validation.  Our  training  set  consisted  of  402  wild 
type  cells  and  399  mutant  cells.  The  results  are  given  in  Table  1,  which  shows  that  the 
program  can  differentiate  between  wild  type  and  mutant  cells.  Furthermore,  Figure  8 
shows that crescent-shaped cells and lemon-shaped cells have different fits.  
 
 
Classified as wild type 
Classified as mutant 
 
FUTURE WORK 
 

Wild type cells 
235 
7 

Mutant cells 
76 
233 

This  research  is  still work-in-progress. Firstly, we want  the program  to be able  to 
successfully  classify  other  types  morphology  mutants,  as  shown  in  Figure  2.  Secondly, 
we  want  to  extend  the  program,  so  that  it  can  automatically  identify  protein 
mislocalization  mutants  from  both  phase  contrast  and  fluorescence  images.  A  bacterial 
cell,  although  small,  has  well-defined  compartments  (for  example  midcell  or  the  poles). 
Over  the  course  of  the  cell  cycle,  different  proteins  localize  to  different  positions  in  the 
cell  (Figure  9).  If  we  fluorescently  tag  the  proteins,  we  can  follow  their  localization 
patterns  over  the  course  of  the  cell  cycle. We  can  then  compare  the  pattern  seen  in wild 
type cells with the pattern in mutant cells. 
 

 
Figure 9. Schematic of the cell cycle localization pattern of ClpXP, a bacterial protease   
(adapted from Iniesta et al., 2006). 

 
 
 

 

6

REFERENCES 
 
Ahmed  N.,  T.  Natarajan,  and  K.R.  Rao.  1974.  Discrete  cosine  transform.  IEEE 
1. 
Trans. Computers C-23: 90-93. 
 
2. 
Iniesta  A.A.,  P.T.  McGrath,  A.  Reisenauer,  H.H.  McAdams,  and  L.  Shapiro. 
2006.  A  phosphor-signaling  pathway  controls  the  localization  and  activity  of  a  protease 
complex  critical  for  bacterial  cell  cycle  progression.  Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  103:  10935-
10940.  
 
3. 
Skerker  J.M.  and M.T.  Laub.  2004.  Cell-cycle  progression  and  the  generation  of 
asymmetry in Caulobacter Crescentus. Nature Rev. Microbiol. 2: 325-337. 
 
Teh C. and R.T. Chin. 1988. On image analysis by the method of moments. IEEE 
4. 
Trans. on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 10: 496-513. 
 
5. 
Zernike  F.  1934.  Beugungstheorie  des  Schneidenverfahrens  und  seiner 
verbesserten  Form,  der  Phasenkontrastmethode  (Diffraction  theory  of  the  cut  procedure 
and its improved form, the phase contrast method). Physica 1: 689-704. 
 

 

7

