The Quest for Dark Matter
CS229 Project Report, Fall 2012

Abhishek Sheshadri∗ , Pranav Pai† , Sreenath Krishnan‡
∗Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Email: abisheks@stanford.edu
†Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Email: pmpai@stanford.edu
‡Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, Email: ksree@stanford.edu

Abstract—The main objective of this project is to devise an
algorithm that is able to predict the locations of multiple dark
matter halos in a given image of galaxy distributions precisely
and without directional bias. It is based on the active Kaggle
competition Observing Dark Worlds, and uses the data, rules
and accuracy measures prescribed by the competition.

I . INTRODUCT ION
Dark matter halos are not directly observable, and this
continues to be a fundamental problem in its detection, and
therefore in our understanding of its behavior. However, these
large clusters tend to have observable effects on the surround-
ing visible neighbors and on light due to their ability to bend
the fabric of space-time via gravitational effects. This leads to
the phenomenon of gravitational lensing, whereby light from
galaxies behind these dark matter clusters is distorted along the
path to our observation point causing an observable distortion
(tangential shearing) of these nearby (in the 2D sky sense)
galaxies.
Understanding dark matter requires accurate estimates of
the positions of these clusters. Till now, physicists have not
been able to predict dark matter locations accurately without
detailed red-shift and x-ray based analysis of particular small
regions in the sky. This process is expensive and can only be
used to verify halos once a reasonable prediction of the halo
locations are made.

I I . TRA IN ING DATA AND OB SERVAT ION S
We were provided with 300 training skies, each with 300-
700 galaxies and 1-3 halos. The locations of the galaxy centers
and the ellipticities (e1 and e2 ) of the galaxies as well as
the halo positions have been provided. The ﬁnal algorithm
will be tested on a different set of skies. In order to evaluate
a prediction, the competition has set a ’metric’ described as
follows:

m =

+ G

F
1000
where m is the metric, F is the average radial distance from
(cid:118)(cid:117)(cid:117)(cid:116)(
the prediction to the true position of the halo and
N(cid:88)
N(cid:88)
i=1
i=1

cos φi )2 + (

sin φi )2

G =

1
N

(1)

(2)

1
N

where N is the total number of halos across all the skies
and φ is a measure of directional bias.
For a completely random prediction of the position of halos,
the metric comes out
to be about 1.94. An open source
software called lenstool is the most widely used and accepted
tool in this ﬁeld and gets a metric of about 1.01 on the test
skies. Instead of just trying to improve on lenstool, we started
off from scratch so that we can have a rich learning experience
and understand and use a variety of algorithms rather than just
trying to improve a ﬁxed algorithm.
If the galaxies were actually circular, they would have just
appeared to be ellipses tangentially aligned to the halo. But
since the galaxies themselves are elliptical (in the 2D sky) and
have random orientations to begin with, the shearing effect of
the galaxies rotates and/or magniﬁes them towards having a
higher tangential ellipticity with respect to the halo. It was
observed that the distributions of e1 and e2 were ∼ N (0, 0.04).
I I I . HA LO MOD EL
The effect of halo on a galaxy can be modeled as a
tangential shear. The magnitude of tangential shear should
go down with distance(r). Assuming the halo is spherically
symmetric the shear can be modeled as:

τtangential =

s
rn

τnormal = ν τtangential

(3)

(4)

This model has 3 parameters [s,n,ν ]. The parameter ’s’ can
be interpreted as the strength of the halo and ’ν ’ can be inter-
preted as an equivalent to Poissons ratio that is encountered in
mechanics of materials. The positive integer ’n’ controls the
rate of decay with distance. As a further simpliﬁcation, we
assume that ν =0. It was found that n=1 ﬁts well with the data
provided.
In order to provide an intuitive picture of the model, let us
consider what effect a halo following equations (3, 4) has on a
circular galaxy with radius ’R’. The galaxy becomes elliptical
r ) and minor axis b = R. Also
with major axis a = R(1+ s
the major axis will be perpendicular to the line joining the
galaxy and halo. It can be proved that the application of halo
is not completely reversible, in the sense there are multiple
initial conﬁgurations of galaxy that can result in the same
ﬁnal conﬁguration.

IV. M ETHOD S FOR S ING LE HA LO SK I E S

A. Net Tangential Ellipticity (NTE)

Fig. 2. An example of a case wherein the halo is not close to the maximum
NTE point. The blue circle shows the predicted halo position and the black
circle shows the actual halo

Fig. 1. A sample 2 halo case. The lines are the major axes of the galaxies
and the 2 black circles are the halo locations. We can see the strong halo is
in a region of high NTE

We observed that the effect of the halo is to increase the
effective ellipticity of a galaxy in a direction tangential to the
line joining the halo and the galaxy. So we calculated the net
tangential ellipticity at each point in the sky due to all the
galaxies and plotted it as a contour plot. In the single halo
case, the point of maximum tangential ellipticity is in general
close to the actual halo location. But in the case of multiple
halos, usually only the strong halo can be identiﬁed in this
manner as shown in Fig. 1.
n(cid:88)
i=1

−(e(i)
1 cos φ(i) + e(i)
2 sin φ(i) )

N T E =

(5)

B. Aligned galaxies as an indicator for outliers

Though the NTE is a good indicator of the location of the
strongest halo for most cases, there are a few cases for which
this does not work and we referred to these cases as ’outliers’.
An example of such a sky is shown in Fig. 2.
In such cases a brief look at the galaxies aligned almost
tangentially to the halo gave us the idea of using the aligned
galaxies alone for calculating the maximum NTE and this
sometimes improves the accuracy of the prediction. Fig. 3
shows all galaxies aligned almost tangentially to the halo.
So, at every point we consider all galaxies almost tangentially
aligned to that point and compute the NTE using these galaxies
only.

Fig. 3. The no. of galaxies aligned almost tangential to the halo is high

C. Logistic Regression
The data as such is not in a form where one can apply
logistic regression directly. This is because we have a single
output (which is the halo position) as a function of a set of
inputs (which are the properties of galaxies). Not only does the
input set has varying length across different training skies, the
corresponding input sets of two different skies are not related.
However this problem can be converted to a standard logistic
regression problem using the following tricks:
• Divide each sky into a ﬁxed number of bins. Each bin is
assumed to be an observation.
• Instead of considering features of each galaxy, one can
now set features for each bin which will be an average
of the feature of galaxies.
• The target variable can now be set as whether a halo is
present in the given bin or not

Fig. 4. Logistic Regression Results

Fig. 5. Maximum Likelihood contours based on Generative Learning Results

1) Feature Selection: It has been shown that a high value
of NTE and a low value of signal mismatch (Section: VI-C)
are both good indicators of the presence of halos. In addition
we also saw there are signiﬁcant numbers of galaxies aligned
tangential
to the halo. Hence it makes sense to use the
following as the input features
• NTE at the center of the bin
• Signal mismatch w.r.t the center of the bin
• The number of galaxies aligned tangentially with the
center of the bin
Since NTE and signal mismatch had widely varying limits
across skies, we decided to scale it between 0 and 1 before
performing the regression.
2) Results: It was found that the third feature is a relatively
weak one. We present the results of logistic regression for the
single halo case in Figure [4]. Such a classiﬁcation can also
accurately predict the position of strongest halo in multiple
halo cases. The performance metric was as low as 0.2387 for
single halo predictions.

P (H |S ) =

=

V. G ENERAT IV E L EARN ING
Let G(i) denote the features of galaxy ’i’ and H denote the
halo features (position and strength) and S = {G(i)}, which
denotes the entire sky. The given problem is to ﬁnd H that
maximizes P(H|S). Using Bayes rule, assuming the galaxy
observations are conditionally independent given H,
n(cid:89)
i=1
P (G(i) ) is constant for a given sky. Since it’s equally likely
that the halo is present anywhere, the prior P(H) is just a
uniform distribution. Since we have already assumed a model
for the halo we can ﬁnd a discrete estimate for P (G(i) |H ).
Even though the expression involves position of galaxies and
halos as well as the halo strength, all these can be characterized
by a particular value of tangential shear. In other words, if we

P (G(i) |H )P (H )
P (G(i) )

P (S |H )P (H )
P (S )

(6)

have a distribution P (e1 , e2 |τ ) where e1 is in the tangential
direction of the halo, we can fully characterize P (G(i) |H ). A
discrete approximation of P (e1 , e2 |τ ) can be obtained by the
following sampling technique:
• Divide the possible values of e1 , e2 and τ into a ﬁnite
number of bins. Let the set of such points be {ei
2 , τ k }
1 , ej
and the bin size be {m x m x p}
• Generate ’q’ (q>>m) pairs of random samples drawn
from N (0,0.04) as candidates for halo absent sky.
• Apply the tangential shear to the samples to ﬁnd the
resulting e(i,j )
, e(i,j )
for all
the ’p’ tangential shear
1
2
values. Here ’i’ is an index for the sample and ’j’ is
an index for the tangential shear.
• The resulting values are discretized to the respective bins
(cid:80)q
• The distribution can be approximated as:
r=1 1{e(r,k)
1

2 } + 1/m
= ej
(7)
We have used laplace smoothing to avoid 0/0 cases when
using this distribution. Hence we can determine the likelihood
P (H |S ) for a given sky at any number of points using
equation 6. The maximum likelihood point is chosen as the
position of halo. The likelihood contour of a typical sky is
shown in Figure [5] This approach is also successful in ﬁnding
the strongest halo (metric of 0.554 for single halo case), which
further justiﬁes the assumptions in the model. This model can
be extended to the case with multiple halos by appropriately
calculating the probability distribution.

2 |τ k ) =
1 , ej
P (ei

1 , e(r,k)
= ei
2
m + q

V I . M ETHOD S FOR MU LT I P LE HA LO SK I E S

Since we are able to identify the strongest halo by means
of one of the methods described above, most of our methods
to ﬁnd the location of the second and third halo assume the
knowledge of the ﬁrst halo.

A. Iterative method based on alignment of galaxies
So far we have seen methods to capture the strongest
or the last-applied halo. In order to get
the second and
third halo location, one of
the ﬁrst methods we tried
was to remove the galaxies which are aligned almost
tangentially to the ﬁrst halo. These are the galaxies
which contribute the most to the high NTE values around
the strong halo. So we removed all galaxies which are
(within ±10 ◦ of
tangential
almost
tangential direction)
and rebuilt
the NTE contour and considered the point
with the maximum NTE to be the halo location. We
do this repeatedly in case of more than 2 halos. This
method gave us a metric of 0.9499 across the training skies.

B. Halo Removal/Elimination Strategy
Given that we have effective methods to determine the
position of the strongest or last-applied halo even in multiple-
halo skies, we now try to unapply the identiﬁed halo so as to
capture the effect of the other halo. From physics literature,
it can be found that the shearing strength of a halo decreases
with distance from the galaxy. We already mentioned this in
the Halo Model section and we also noted that such a model is
non-invertible. However we can ﬁnd an approximate inverse by
specifying additional constraints. In the present case, given a
ﬁnal conﬁguration we selected the initial conﬁguration that has
the minimum ellipticity. This makes the model invertible i.e.
we can apply a negative strength of the same magnitude and
approximately recover the original sky. However, we need to
have an estimate for the strength of the halo before unapplying
the halo. To ﬁnd an estimate for the strength:
1. We assume the position of the strong halo known (from
one of the single-halo methods).
2. We apply a halo onto the ideal sky at this location with
varying halo strengths and calculate minimum-mismatch value
(described in the next section) of the sky.
3. We consider the strength which causes the least min-
mismatch as the strength of the halo. Lets call this strength
So .
Now we can use the halo model to obtain e1 and e2 of
sky without the halo. We can then try one of our single-halo
capturing methods to get the second halo. Fig. 3 shows the
unapplication/removal of the halo. Here the strength of the
halo removed is varied and the resultant NTE maps shown.
for 2-halo and 3-halo cases
This method works well
in identifying the ﬁrst 2 halos but does not work
very well when going from second to third halo.
This method gives us a overall metric of 0.94 across
the training skies and about 1.1 on the test skies.
all

C. Minimum mismatch methods
The mean of the ellipticities e1 and e2 are both zero. This
tells us that many of the galaxies are close to circular before
halo application. We also experimented with the order of
application of the halo and based on our observations that the

Fig. 6. Effect of halo removal. The strong halo at the bottom right corner
is removed gradually and it can be seen that the red patch moves near the
second halo indicating its position

last applied halo has a high probability of being the strongest
halo in terms of the NTE, we decided to assume that the
strongest halo according to the NTE is also the last applied.
In this method we do the following:
1. Discretize the sky into bins or basically create sampling
points across the sky.
2. Create an ideal sky i.e a sky with the same galaxy
locations but zero ellipticities (basically circular galaxies).
3. At each point (or bin center), use our halo model and a
guessed strength and apply the halo on the ideal sky placing
it at this sampling point.
4. Now apply the ﬁrst known strong halo onto this above
sky using our model and the ’optimal strength’ for this halo
(described in the previous section). Let the resulting sky have
ellipticities e1o and e2o .
match like (cid:112)(cid:107)e1 − e1o (cid:107)2
5. Calculate the ”mismatch” between this resulting sky and
the actual given sky. We have used various deﬁnitions of mis-
2 + (cid:107)e2 − e2o (cid:107)2
2 and (cid:107)etan − etano (cid:107)2
etc.
5. We ﬁnd the point in the sky which has the least mismatch
as the halo prediction and call this mismatch value as the
minimum mismatch or min-mismatch.
6. We repeat steps 1-5 for various strengths and take the
result which had the least overall min-mismatch value as the
location of the second halo.
This method of using min-mismatch described above can
be used in the single halo case also where step 4 will not
be required. We used this as an alternate to NTE-based
approached for the single halo cases and obtained slightly
better results overall.
This method again works well for 2 halo cases but not so
well for 3 halo cases because in the 3 halo case, even after
assuming the location and strength of 1 halo (the strongest
one), we have 2 halo locations and strengths to vary and test
the mismatch. It becomes both inefﬁcient and ineffective when
trying to vary all 4 parameters and trying to ﬁnd the least
mismatch. The overall metric is about 1.01 on the training

skies.

V I I . F IX ED PO IN T M ETHOD
It was shown how NTE calculations fail for some single
halo cases. The root cause of the problem is that the halo is
weak to cause any signiﬁcant change to the galaxies. However,
this would have been possible if we had information about the
initial sky(the sky before the application of halos). It is natural
to ask if there is a method to recover the initial sky. Let Ei
and Eo denote the ellipticities of initial sky and observed sky
respectively. These two skies can be related using the halo
model. Let F denote the halo function of the given sky that
takes galaxy features as input, applies the tangential shear and
return the modiﬁed galaxy. Then we have:

(8)

Eo = F (Ei )
F(0) will then denote the ellipticities had the galaxies been
circular to start with. One key observation that we made is
depicted in Figure [8]. The ﬁgure is generated based on the
model. The top left ﬁgure shows the NTE distribution of the
observed sky for a weak halo case. Clearly a prediction using
maxima of NTE will result in a signiﬁcant error. The reason
for that is clear in the top right ﬁgure, which shows the NTE
distribution of the initial sky. The effect of the halo is weak
enough not to shift the maxima to its position. However if we
look at the difference(bottom left), we ﬁnd that the maxima
is exactly at the halo. This means that if we apply maxima
of NTE criteria over the difference, it would not fail even
for weak halos. Another remarkable observation is that the
difference is very similar to the NTE distribution of sky formed
by applying the halo onto a circular set of galaxies. Since
equation 5 can be represented as NTE = A E, where E denotes
the ellipticities, the above observation can be written as
AF (0) ≈ AEo − AEi
⇒ AF (0) ≈ AF (Ei ) − AEi
Assuming g(x) = AF(x) - AF(0), the equation simpliﬁes to:
g(Ei ) ≈ Ei
This is clearly ﬁnding a ﬁxed point of the function g
different from zero. The ﬁxed point gives us the initial sky.
This is slightly more complicated than a standard ﬁxed point
problem because the function g(x) is speciﬁed only if one
speciﬁes both halo position and strength.

(11)

(9)

(10)

V I I I . OTH ER ID EA S EX P LOR ED
1) Direction of maximum expectation: This is a concept
useful in case of two halos. Here we assume that the
expected value of ellipticity will be maximum in the
direction of line joining the two halos. The assumption
holds fairly well
if the strength of both halos are
relatively close.(Figure [8])
2) k-means over intersection points: This is again an exten-
sion of the aligned galaxies concept. The assumption that
there will be a signiﬁcant number of galaxies aligned

Fig. 7. NTE Contours to explain the ﬁxed point iteration

Fig. 8. Direction of maximum expectation. The red dot indicate the angle
between halos

with the halo, would also mean that the intersection of
minor axis of galaxies are expected to cluster around
the halo. We calculated all the intersection points and
applied k-means clustering over those points. However,
this method works only for strong halos.
3) Gravitational lensing approximations: The average el-
lipticity for an unlensed sky (a sky without a halo) is
zero. According to the weak lens approximation, the
average ellipticity in a lensed sky can be used as an
approximation to the average shear with lensing. We
used this idea to get an estimate of the strength of
the halo in order to un-apply it. However this did not
work, because in a multiple halo case this average is
an indicator of the net strength rather than the strength
of the strongest halo and probably also because the
simulated data is not made to conform to this.

