Use of Machine Learning in Petroleum Production
Optimization under Geological Uncertainty

Obia julu J. Isebor
Ognjen Grujic

December 14, 2012

1 Abstract

Geological uncertainty is of
signiﬁcant
concern in petroleum reservoir modeling
with the goal of maximizing oil produc-
tion. Stochastic simulation allows generat-
ing multiple reservoir models that can be
used to characterize this uncertainty. How-
ever, the large computation time needed for
ﬂow simulation (e.g., for use in production
forecasting) impedes the evaluation of ﬂow
on all reservoir models.
In addition, per-
forming a formal optimization of the well
controls to maximize say NPV leads to hun-
dreds or thousands of function evaluations,
each of which requires tens to hundreds
of reservoir simulations depending on the
number of reservoir models available.
In this work we apply machine learning
techniques to provide computational sav-
ings on two fronts. We use kernel k-means
clustering to select a small representative
set of earth models that characterize the
geological uncertainty so as to reduce the
number of simulations for each optimiza-
tion function evaluation, and use a kriging
surrogate in the optimization to reduce the
required number of function evaluations.

2 Introduction

The task of optimizing the production from
an oil ﬁeld is a tough one fraught with the-
oretical and computational challenges cen-
tered around the uncertainties that are an

intrinsic part of the problem. Firstly, as the
petroleum reservoir from which we plan to
produce is below the surface of the earth, we
only have approximate models of what we
think the reservoir looks like. In attempts
to capture this geological uncertainty in the
reservoir description, tens to hundreds of
probable earth models with diﬀerent reser-
voir properties and property distributions
are typically generated using stochastic sim-
ulation.
Generating these diﬀerent
realization
models is not a goal in and of itself but the
use of the models to understand the uncer-
tainty in modeling some response function
is what we are after. The response function
is typically a measure of the performance of
the ﬁeld, e.g., cumulative oil production or
net present value (NPV), that is of inter-
est to decision makers in charge of manag-
ing the ﬁeld’s production. In recent years,
techniques from the ﬁeld of numerical opti-
mization have been applied to optimize our
measure of ﬁeld performance so that we can
plan to get the best out of our ﬁeld moving
forward in time, given the information we
know about the ﬁeld right now.
Our pro ject involved the investigation of
the use of machine learning methods to clas-
sify the tens to hundreds of earth mod-
els, and select a small representative subset,
that still represents the uncertainty range,
to use for forecasting or optimization. This
is done in order to not run numerical reser-
voir simulations (which can be quite expen-

1

sive) on all the models but only a subset
of them, while still spanning the range of
uncertainty in the desired response (e.g.,
NPV).
In addition to earth model selection, we
would also like to investigate the use of ma-
chine learning methods as proxies for the
ob jective function evaluations during the
optimization process. For example, having
a supervised learning algorithm, like a krig-
ing surrogate, trained to reproduce the re-
sponse might provide signiﬁcant savings in
an optimization process that requires run-
ning hundreds or thousands of simulations
by replacing a good number of these simula-
tions (which could take minutes to hours to
run each, depending on the size of the reser-
voir model) with approximations from the
kriging surrogate (which runs in a fraction
of a second).

3 Problem statement

The problem we aim to solve is the opti-
mization of well controls in a petroleum ﬁeld
produced under waterﬂooding, where water
is pumped through injection wells in order
to maintain reservoir pressure and displace
the resident oil toward production wells.
Simulating the ﬂow through the petroleum
reservoir, in order to ascertain injection and
production volumes for NPV calculations,
is done with the use of a reservoir simu-
lator (in this work, we use the Stanford-
developed reservoir simulator called GPRS
[4]).
The well controls (part of the inputs
to the reservoir simulator) being optimized
are the injection and production bottom-
hole pressures (BHPs) and the ob jective is
to maximize undiscounted NPV from the
petroleum ﬁeld. Due to the uncertainty in
the reservoir description, the optimization
is performed in a robust manner where the
ob jective function is actually the expected
value of the pro jected production given a
set of well controls, characterized as the av-

erage of NPV over several geological real-
izations. Formally stated, the optimization
Nr∑
problem we aim to solve is given as
j=1

NPV (x; mj ) ;

1
Nr

max
x2X

J (x) =

(1)

where x represents the vector of well control
variables (well BHPs), X = fx 2 Rn ; xl (cid:20)
x (cid:20) xug represents the box constraints for
the control variables, Nr is the number of
geological realizations, mj represents the
geological model parameters for realization
j , and the undiscounted NPV from each
|
{z
}
model is given by
(cid:0)
NPV (x; mj ) = poQo (x; mj )
|
|
{z
}
{z
}
(cid:0) cwiQwi (x; mj )
oil revenue
cwpQwp (x; mj )
;(2)
water injection cost
water production cost

where po ; cwp and cwi are the price of oil
and costs of produced and injected water
per barrel, respectively. Qo ; Qwp and Qwi
are the cumulative oil and water produc-
tion and water injection in barrels, respec-
tively. These are the outputs from the
reservoir simulator that are required for
the NPV computation. Figure 1 below
presents the workﬂow for the average NPV
calculation for running example used in the
pro ject. This example involves using 45 ge-

Figure 1:
Illustration of computation of
NPVs for full set of realizations.

ological realizations (15 each produced from
stochastic simulations assuming 3 diﬀerent
depositional environments). The ﬁeld has
eight wells, four production (red circles in
ﬁgure) and four injection (blue circles in

2

ﬁgure) wells. With these well locations to-
gether with the initial speciﬁed well controls
of constant injection and production, the 45
reservoir simulations are run, resulting in
45 injection and production proﬁles (only
oil production proﬁles shown in Figure 1)
from which we can calculate 45 NPV val-
ues, shown as an empirical cumulative den-
sity function (CDF) in Figure 1. From these
45 NPV values, we can calculate the aver-
age NPV, <NPV>, which is the ob jective
function value for the initial set of controls.

4 Machine learning for
computational savings

From equations (1) and (2) we see that each
evaluation of the ob jective function in the
optimization requires running Nr reservoir
simulations (45 simulations in our exam-
ple). In addition, the optimization process
can require hundreds to thousands of func-
tion evaluations, depending on the complex-
ity of the problem and the optimization al-
gorithm used. It is no surprise that this op-
timization process considering the diﬀerent
geological realization can be quite expen-
sive. As a result, we investigate using ma-
chine learning techniques to provide compu-
tational savings on two ma jor fronts: reduc-
ing the number of realizations using clus-
tering, while still eﬀectively characterizing
the geological uncertainty in the problem,
in order to reduce the simulations needed
for each ob jective function evaluation; and
using an optimization approach that uses a
kriging surrogate to reduce the number of
function evaluations that require reservoir
simulations.

4.1 Clustering
and
model selection

earth

The idea of using k-means clustering for
earth model selection to represent uncer-
tainty in model responses using a subset
of the original models was introduced by

Scheidt and Caers in 2009 [6] (details of the
approach can be found in this paper).
In
Figure 2 we present an illustration of the
process for our running example.

Figure 2: Earth model selection process.

The process illustrated in Figure 2 shows
our clustering and model selection process
and the diﬀerent parts of the process are as
follows

1. Given the initial well controls, we gen-
erate the model responses (cumulative
oil production proﬁles) for all 45 reser-
voir models using the process illus-
trated in Figure 1.

2. Find pairwise distances between the
the model responses.

3. Map with multi-dimensional scaling
(MDS) into a 2D MDS space, as is done
in [6].

4. Transform using a Gaussian kernel into
a low-dimensional feature space where
the points for each model are more sep-
arable.

5. Perform k-means clustering to cluster
the data into six clusters (diﬀerent col-
ors in Figure 2) and identify the models
that are the closest to the cluster cen-
troids.

6. Transform back to the MDS space and
identify the selected earth models.

3

7. Identify six selected model responses
and show that they span the same un-
certainty range as the initial 45 models.

every time the polling step is unsuccessful,
using the new points that were evaluated in
the polling process.

8. Show that the selected models repro-
duce the ensemble statistics (P10, P50
and P90) as the initial set of models,
again for the initial well controls.

4.2 Surrogate-based optimiza-
tion

After performing the model selection ex-
plained in the preceding subsection, we now
need to run the optimization in order to de-
termine the optimal well controls that max-
imize <NPV>. We applied a surrogate-
based search-poll optimization procedure
introduced by Booker et al. [3], with a modi-
ﬁed implementation from Abramson [1] and
illustrated below in Figure 3.

5 Results

We ran the optimization codes on our well
control problem for several cases, with the
original 45 models and with the selected 6
models, as well as with and without the use
of the kriging surrogate in the optimization
process. Our pro ject results are summa-
rized below in Figure 4.
In Figure 4a we

(a) Improvement due to
surrogate use

(b) Improvement due to
model number reduction

Figure 3:
workﬂow.

Surrogate-based optimization

The poll step involves using the general-
ized pattern search (GPS) algorithm of Au-
det and Dennis Jr. [2], which uses a stencil-
based approach to identify points in opti-
mization parameter space to evaluate the
ob jective function. Before each poll step,
there is a search step where a fast-running
surrogate is optimized and the resulting well
controls applied to the true ob jective func-
tion evaluation. We use a kriging surrogate
(from the DACE kriging toolbox [5]), which
is essentially a response surface approximat-
ing the true ob jective function surface. The
initial surrogate is built from points from a
Latin hypercube search (LHS) and updated,

4

(c) Initial NPV CDFs

(d) Final NPV CDFs

Figure 4: Performance result comparisons.

show the improvement in computational ef-
ﬁciency of optimization with and without
surrogates. We see that with the use of the
kriging surrogate, there is a rapid increase
in <NPV> after only a few true function
evaluations because we are doing a lot of the
optimization on the surrogates and running
the results on the true function evaluation.
To get an idea of the timing, one surrogate
function evaluation is a small fraction of a
second, where each true function evaluation
is about 30 seconds, for this simple case.
The point of Figure 4a is that we get about
the same optimal solution but with much
less function evaluations.
In Figure 4b we show the improvement
in computational eﬃciency due to reduc-

020040060080010001200−20−15−10−505101520Number of function evaluationsAverage NPV ($ MM)  45 realizations, without surrogate6 realizations, with surrogate01020304050−20−15−10−505101520Number of simulations (thousands)Average NPV ($ MM)  45 realizations, without surrogate6 realizations, with surrogate−150−100−5005000.20.40.60.81NPV ($ MM)F(NPV)  45 realizations, without surrogate6 realizations, with surrogate−5051015202500.20.40.60.81NPV ($ MM)F(NPV)  45 realizations, without surrogate6 realizations, with surrogateing the number of reservoir models that
characterize the uncertainty in the prob-
lem. For the case with Nr realizations, each
function evaluation corresponds to Nr reser-
voir simulations and thus reducing the num-
ber of models needed to characterize uncer-
tainty directly leads to a reduction in num-
ber of simulations needed for the optimiza-
tion. Combine this with the improvement
in computational eﬃciency from including
surrogate use in the optimization and we
get the comparison shown in Figure 4b.
Figures 4c and 4d present the initial
and ﬁnal CDFs respectively for the cases
where we optimize <NPV> from all ini-
tial 45 models without using a surrogate
and where we optimize <NPV> from only
the six models with surrogate use in the
optimization. The ﬁgures show that the
six-model representation of uncertainty is
just as good as the one with 45 models.
The optimization is successful in improv-
ing the performance from the reservoir. Ini-
tially, <NPV> was negative meaning that
the pro ject is unproﬁtable under the sce-
nario where we implement the initial well
controls. After optimization, we improve
<NPV> to about $15 million. Our opti-
mized well controls are also more robust be-
cause the range of NPVs in the ﬁnal CDF
is $20 million, compared with about $130
million for the initial well controls.

6 Concluding remarks

In this work, we successfully implemented
an approach for optimizing well controls in
petroleum production under geological un-
certainty. This process can be computa-
tionally expensive but we present machine
learning approaches to improve the compu-
tational eﬃciency of the optimization ap-
proach.
We showed that MDS and kernel k-means
clustering is suitable for selecting a repre-
sentative subset of earth models. For our
waterﬂooding well control optimization ex-

ample, we showed that surrogate-based op-
timization, using a kriging surrogate, sig-
niﬁcantly reduces the optimization compu-
tational cost. Our results show that the
optimized well control obtained with our
surrogate-based approach run on the se-
lected subset of reservoir models is compa-
rable in terms of quality of solution with the
full optimization with 45 models, while re-
quiring signiﬁcantly less computational ex-
pense.

References

[1] M. A. Abramson. NOMADm version
4.6 User’s Guide. Department of Math-
ematics and Statistics, Air Force Insti-
tute of Technology, 2007.

[2] C. Audet and J. E. Dennis Jr. Analysis
of generalized pattern searches. SIAM
Journal on Optimization, 13(3):889–
903, 2002.

[3] A. J. Booker, J. E. Dennis Jr., P. D.
Frank, D. B. Seraﬁni, V. Torczon, and
M. W. Trosset. A rigorous framework
for optimization of expensive functions
by surrogates. Structural Optimization,
17:1–13, 1999.

[4] H. Cao. Development of Techniques for
General Purpose Simulators. PhD the-
sis, Department of Petroleum Engineer-
ing, Stanford University, 2002.

[5] S. N. Lophaven, H. B. Nielsen, and
J. Sondergaard. DACE: A Matlab krig-
ing toolbox, version 2.0. Technical re-
port, Technical University of Denmark,
2002.

[6] C. Scheidt and J. Caers. Uncertainty
quantiﬁcation in reservoir performance
using distances and kernel methods:
Application to a west africa deepwa-
ter turbidite reservoir. SPE Journal,
14(4):680–692, 2009.

5

