Automated detection and repair of visual distortion in data
graphics

Alex Kindel

December 14, 2012

Introduction

problems dened in this section.

Computer-generated data graphics are a ubiquitous
tool for communicating scientic ndings to non-
specialists. Visualization is a particularly appropri-
ate mode of quantitative representation for commu-
nicating to non-specialists because it assumes only
basic spatial and mathematical knowledge: the abil-
ity to identify discrete ob jects, estimate their relative
sizes, and identify a simple quantitative comparison.
Despite this widespread usage of data visualization
as a tool for communicating information, however,
there are a number of common distortions that can
transform data graphics from intuitive to misleading.
In this paper, I lay out three of the most common
kinds of distortion (color misuse, nonlinear scaling,
unnecessary dimensions) and demonstrate a tool for
detecting and repairing distortion in bar charts, one
of the most common forms of data visualization.

The learning/design problem

To be useful in a real-world context, the learning/de-
sign problem is posed in the following way. The tool
is provided with a bar chart whose labels and axes
have been removed, along with a vector containing
the labels for each bar. The tool doesn't store knowl-
edge from previous runs.1 Ideally, the tool should run
quickly to accommodate the average user's attention
span and level of investment in testing data graphics.
Given these challenges, I selected algorithms primar-
ily based on how quickly they could the solve sub-

1 Storing this knowledge could make the problem easier: see
Challenges section for discussion.

Misuse of color

Formally, colors are represented by points in the dis-
crete, nite RGB-model subspace: (r, g , b) ∈ Srgb ⊆
R3 . Generally, the number of colors used in a nondis-
torted graphic should be, at most, the number of data
points being represented (i.e. each representation has
its own color) plus one color (usually white) for the
background. Additional colors would be inappropri-
ate because multiple colors in the background or bars
would distract from the data being communicated.
Fewer colors are possible in a number of cases, e.g.
all bars being the same color to avoid any color dis-
tortion issues. Still, even in a graphic which uses
the appropriate number of colors, the colors of indi-
vidual representations may be unevenly distributed
across the color spectrum. To repair this issue, colors
can be initially assigned to nearby basic colors (RGB,
CMY) at the corners of the color space, which guar-
antees maximum contrast between bars. These basic
assignments can then be moved to the center of the
cluster to approximate the average of the colors be-
ing reassigned, which minimizes the visibility of the
repairs.
As it turns out, this subproblem can be quickly
solved using a modied implementation of k-means
clustering. Each pixel in the input image is mapped
onto Srgb , and centroids are initialized to colors on
the boundary of the space (starting with corners).
This runs relatively quickly because the nature of the
color subspace limits the number of possible states
the centroid can end up in. Additionally, the toler-

1

ance value can be set relatively high, since an abso-
lute convergence isn't necessarily more desirable than
a relatively less-exact assignment for each bar.

Detecting nonlinear scaling

In data visualization, geometric shapes are used to
represent relative quantities, usually numbers or per-
centages.
In a nondistorted graphic, the size of a
representation scales linearly with the data it repre-
sents. Formally, a scaling function can be represented
as follows:

yi = kxi

Observe that the data point xi and the area of its vi-
sual representation yi are related only by k , the scal-
ing factor. Importantly, linear data scaling preserves
the observer's ability to correctly compare multiple
pieces of quantitative data by examining their repre-
sentations. The converse is also true: nonlinear data
scaling can lead to errors resulting from visual com-
parison, especially if the graphic is unlabeled.

For example: say an observer sees a simplistic data
graphic, as follows:

Was your estimate correct? Seems unlikely. For-
mally, the observed ratio between the bars is around

ˆy1 : ˆy2 :: 2 : 1

but the actual ratio of values for each bar is

x1 : x2 :: 3 : 2.

Note that the actual ratio for the bars is

y1 : y2 :: 9 : 4

If we t a data scaling function to this graphic, we
get y = x2 , i.e. the graphic has nonlinear (quadratic,
in this case) scaling. This is a strong indicator of
distortion. So, if we learn a linear data scaling func-
tion from the graphical representation that doesn't t
with the corresponding labels, the graphic is neces-
sarily distorted.
To perform this repair step in practice, it turns out
to be easier to calculate the area of each bar instead
of its height. Area is a reliable proxy only if the
width of each bar is constant, as was the case for
test data in this pro ject, but future implementations
should use height data instead. This module used
k-means clustering to quickly assign a label to each
pixel based on its color and its adjacency to other
pixels. This was necessary because the prior run of
k-means didn't necessarily assign a unique color to
each bar, so this run needed to take the location of
the pixel in the image into account as well.

Challenges

What do you estimate the proportion to be? (It
seems fair to estimate that the larger bar is twice as
large as the smaller bar, but feel free to make your
own estimate.) Then, what if you later discovered
the following labelings for each bar?

Unnecessary dimensions, on-line learning,
other chart types

As a general rule, the dimensionality of the graphic
should not exceed the dimensionality of the data it

2

comes a nontrivial task. Other kinds of data graphic
also present a challenge, especially when the orga-
nizing metaphor for the graphic varies from 'area-
representing-number'. For example, how would one
computationally detect distortion in line graphs?

Conclusion

Machine learning and interaction design

As it turned out, the design of the tool relied exclu-
sively on k-means as the learning algorithm of choice.
After trying PCA for the color module, it turned out
that k-means was faster and resulted in fewer errors.
This may have been a result of the data-impoverished
nature of this particular problem: the limitation to
a discretized, nite color subspace, as well as the rel-
atively small size of each graphic, meant that run-
ning any algorithm was close in complexity to do-
ing the same task by brute force (i.e. simply going
through the image pixel by pixel). Additionally, dur-
ing the design process, it became clear that the tool
may be limiting to users with more skill at generating
graphics. This highlighted a need for balance between
skilled users, who would be able to design data graph-
ics more exibly while still maintaining good cogni-
tive design principles (similar to how skilled writers
can play with grammar), whereas beginners would
need more scaolding to create good graphics. The
overarching question of 'what's the point' still re-
mains: how can this tool best encourage behavior
change in users? As a philosophical aside, the pro-
cess this tool goes through to learn about distorted
graphics closely mirrors how humans might learn to
perform the same task, including the transfer step
previously described. This pro ject shows that sim-
ple learning algorithms are best for this kind of basic
graphical distortion test, but how can the context
surrounding that nding be best mobilized to sup-
port human learners?

is representing. This is most frequently an issue with
three dimensional bar or pie charts, which are often
used for perceived aesthetic benets rather than ac-
tual clarity of representation. To detect this avor
of distortion, we need to learn a representation of
the shape of each geometric representation, then de-
termine whether it is a proper rectangle. For this
portion of the pro ject, a reliable and general method
of detecting shape wasn't found. It was possible to
subdivide the graph into matrices for each bar, but
this approach was computationally expensive and un-
reliable. Since the scope of this pro ject was limited
to bar charts with correct dimensionality, this wasn't
an issue, but further implementations should take 3D
charts into account.
A serious diculty for this problem was the need
to analyze each data graphic independently. This
'within-sub jects' design for the tool and its under-
lying learning problem was more true-to-life because
this tool would need to make a judgment on each data
graphic as it came up. Additionally, each bar chart is
relatively data-poor, in the sense that each has only
a handful of bars/data labels to evaluate. This make
the explicit computation of distortion very simple,
but increases the complexity of the natural next-step
question:
is it possible for the tool to learn which
graphical patterns are indicative of distortion with-
out explicitly computing the distortion?
This would represent a 'between-sub jects' design
for the tool, as well as an underlying supervised learn-
ing meta-problem. The program would store an ab-
straction for the critical values in the data graphic,
as well as a binary distortion label for each graphic.
It would be interesting to see whether this approach
increases the speed of the classication. Importantly,
this approach doesn't allow repair of detected distor-
tions, but if it is markedly faster than the explicit
approach, it could be useful as a pre-processing step
to improve the execution time of the tool.
Another source of diculty came from consider-
ing other types of data graphic, especially pie charts.
Bar charts were especially tractable for the scaling
problem because they're ordered from left to right,
which made comparisons with the labels straightfor-
ward. With pie charts, however, the polygons are ar-
ranged in a circle, so assigning labels to polygons be-

3

