CS 229 Project Milestone Report: Automated
Segmentation of Breast Density
Rebecca L. Sawyer

1

Abstract—This project is to develop an automated breast
density segmentation system. Breast density has been shown to
be a key indicator of breast cancer risk. Currently the primary
computational system for analyzing breast density is a semi-
automated segmentation system that requires a radiologist to set
thresholds for the segmentation algorithm. This results in reader
variability, which reduces the validity of the density assessment.
I propose a fully automated segmentation system. The system
will utilize superpixels and neighborhood information to create
visual dictionaries from training data and use this information to
segment image patches (small superpixels) as dense or not dense.

I . IN TRODUC T ION
Breast cancer affects approximately 1 in 8 women in the
United States, and it is the leading cause of cancer deaths
amongst women worldwide [1]. It has be shown that early
detection is an important factor in cancer survival. Mam-
mography is beneﬁcial for early detection of breast cancer
[2]. Currently, the American Cancer Society recommends that
women with average risk for breast cancer get yearly screening
mammograms to detect potentially malignant ﬁndings at an
early stage [3].
Of the mammographic risk factors for breast cancer, breast
density has been shown to be a signiﬁcant predictor. Women
with increased breast density are four to six times more likely
to develop breast cancer [4,5]. In current practice, the overall
mammographic breast density is reported by the radiologist
qualitatively on a four-point scale using the Breast Imaging,
Reporting and Data System (BIRADS) [6]. Although this
standard has speciﬁc reporting guidelines, it is qualitative and
subject to the inherent variability of radiology reporting [7-
9]. It has been suggested that quantitative breast density can
provide a more robust predictor of mammography risk.
Recently, there has been growing interest in reproducible
quantitative methods for estimating breast density. Initial meth-
ods were based on hand-drawn segmentations of the breast
and dense tissue. However, with the development of digital
mammography, more semi-automated approaches are being
studied. In these methods, the radiologist outlines the area
of the breast parenchyma and the total area of the breast, or
semi-automatic segmentation of the mammogram is performed
by radiologists adjusting software parameters [4]. The current
state-of-the-art method for semi-automated segmentation is
the Cumulus software [10,11]. This method requires the user
to participate in producing the segmentation, which is time-
consuming and disrupts the workﬂow. My goal was to develop
a fully automated method of quantifying breast density. This
would eliminate user variability and provide an efﬁcient means
to quantify breast cancer risk.

J accardI ndex =

My previous efforts towards this goal also involved an un-
supervised feature learning approach to classify image patches
has dense or not dense. This method involved the extraction
of 5x5 pixel image patches and then clustering of the patches
using k-means. The ﬁnal feature vector for each patch was
the distance of the patch to each cluster, resulting in a vector
of length k. The patch classiﬁcation was then performed
using L1 -regularized logistic regression classiﬁer (LASSO).
The results were evaluated by two metrics: per-pixel accuracy
predicted (cid:84) true
and the jaccard index as shown in Equation 1
predicted (cid:83) true
where R1 and R2 , in our case, correspond to masks of
the actual density and the predicted density. The average
per-pixel accuracy was approximately 99%, which is not
surprising considering the ratio of non-dense patches to dense
patches. The average Jaccard index, however, was 0.605. This
shows that there is room for improvement in breast density
segmentation.
I made alterations to improve upon my previous work by
making the following changes: (1) using superpixels instead
of square patches and (2) incorporating neighbor information
into the patch classiﬁcation. I will explain more about these
changes and why each of them could improve classiﬁcation in
the next section. Results of this work will be shown in Section
III, and conclusions will follow.

(1)

I I . MAT ER IA L S AND M ETHOD S
I built a system that
takes an input of a cranio-caudal
view of a breast and outputs a binary mask delineating dense
regions as described in Figure 1. It works by dividing the
image into superpixels using vlfeat-0.9.14 software package
and characterizes these superpixels. The features are then used
to train a LASSO classiﬁer using glmnet software to estimate
the probability of density given the features. Whole patches
are classiﬁed as dense if the probability is higher than a given
threshold that is determined during training. Each patch is then
mapped to original breast image to create a density mask.

A. Data Set
I obtained 19 cranio-caudal mammography images that have
been segmented by an expert radiologist using Cumulus soft-
ware. The Cumulus company developed an algorithm that uses
thresholding-based segmentation to distinguish dense and non-
dense breast tissue [10,11]. The images are scanned ﬁlm ﬁles
and have been subsequently normalized to have equal optical

2

(2)

(3)

(4)

D =

ds =

)2m2

d2
c + (

formed in step size S , a free parameter to optimize via cross-
validation. Next, the algorithm computes a modiﬁed version
of k-means that calculates distances (or ”searches” for points
of its class) in a 2S x2S region around each centroid. The
(cid:113)
distance equations are shown below:
(gi − gj )2
(cid:113)
dc =
(xi − xj )2 + (yi − yj )2
(cid:114)

ds
S
where dc is the distance between colors, ds is the distance
between columns and rows of the image, and D is the overall
distance calculation. Note that dc would normally consist
of differences between r, g, and b values. However, since
mammograms are grayscale images, this is simpliﬁed to the
distance between the grayscale values. Also, of note is the
parameter m in Equation 4. This parameter is used to control
the tradeoff between spatial and intensity distances. It
is
another parameter to be chosen via cross validation.
The combination of spatial distance and intensity measures
results in pixel groups that are more homogeneous than
uniformly extracted square patches. The result is that these
sets of pixels will be more accurately classiﬁed since each set
is classiﬁed together.
2) Superpixel Features: The original system was modiﬁed
to extract superpixels and to obtain SIFT features and sta-
tistical features (mean and variance). The features are then
clustered using k-means in order to obtain a dictionary of
visual words to use for classiﬁcation. From there the system
classiﬁes using LASSO.
The SIFT algorithm ﬁrst ﬁnds local maxima and minima
by convolving the image with Gaussians at various scales and
then taking the difference of the images. Maxima and minima
are then found by comparison with neighboring pixels. This
is repeated at each level near the maxima and minima of the
previous level until the maxima or minima no longer appears.
The maxima and minima that remain (considered stable)
correspond to key locations in the image. The next step in to
characterize the image and each of these key locations. This
is accomplished ﬁrst my computing the gradient magnitude,
(cid:113)
Mi,j , and the orientation, Ri,j , at each pixel, Ai,j :
(Ai,j − Ai + 1, j )2 + (Ai, j − Ai, j + 1)2
Mi,j =
Ri,j = arctan 2(Ai,j − Ai + 1, j , Ai,j+1 − Ai,j )
The gradient magnitudes are thresholded at 0.1 times the
maximum possible gradient value in order to obtain limited
effect by illumination changes. Next, each image is a assigned
an orientation. This is done so that the image descriptors will
be invariant to rotation. An orientation histogram is created
by applying a Gaussian-weighted window. The weights are
multiplied my the thresholded gradient magnitude, then binned
to form a histogram in locations corresponding to Ri,j . Then,
key location descriptors are obtained [14].

(5)

(6)

Fig. 1. System Overview

Fig. 2. Feature Extraction Flowchart

density values. The radiologist performing the segmentation is
a trained expert in Cumulus and has over 18 years experience
using semi-automated thresholding based density segmentation
experience. I use these segmentation results as ground truth for
training and evaluation of our system.

B. Image Processing
The images are analyzed by ﬁrst segmenting the image into
superpixels for analysis. These superpixels provide a robust
way to describe local areas of an image. The superpixels are
then characterized using real-valued features that are derived
entirely from the data Figure 2. Once features are extracted
for each patch, they are used to train a LASSO classiﬁer to
predict their density state [12].
1) Superpixel Extraction: Superpixels are groupings of
pixels related by distance as well as intensity values. The
algorithm I used to extract superpixels is the simple linear
iterative clustering (SLIC) algorithm [13]. SLIC works by ﬁrst
initializing cluster centroids of column, row, intensity values
at equally spaced points in a grid across the image. The grid is

3

Original
Modiﬁed without CRF
Modiﬁed with CRF

Mean Accuracy Mean Jaccard Index
0.605
0.894
0.584
0.906
0.811
0.302
TABLE I
M EAN ACCURACY AND M EAN JACCARD IND EX O F TH E OR IG INAL
SY ST EM , TH E MOD I FIED SY ST EM W I THOU T CRF S , AND TH E MOD I FIED
SY ST EM W I TH CRF S .

After obtaining SIFT features, k-means is used to transform
these features into a dictionary of visual words, using each
cluster centroid as an individual word.

−log(P (c|G; w) =

Ψ(ci |si ) + w

C. Superpixel Classiﬁcation
The authors [15] performed similar image processing us-
ing the quick shift algorithm for obtaining superpixels, then
ﬁnding SIFT features. They found success using support
vector machines (SVM) for classiﬁcation and then incorpo-
rating neighborhood information using conditional random
ﬁelds (CRFs). Mathematically, P (c|G; w) is the conditional
probability of the set of class label assignments c given the
adjacency graph G(S, E ) and a weight w:
(cid:88)
(cid:88)
si∈S
si ,sj ∈E

Φ(ci , cj |si , sj )
(7)
Here, S refers to the collection of superpixels in a given
image. Also, we have:
Ψ(ci |si ) = −log(P (ci |si ))
(8)
The calculation of Ψ(ci |si ) comes from the SVM. And ﬁ-
nally, Φ(ci , cj |si , sj ) is a measure of pairwise edge potentials:
1+ (cid:107) si − sj (cid:107) 1[ci (cid:54)= cj ]
Φ(ci , cj |si , sj ) =
L(si , sj )
(9)
where 1[ci (cid:54)= cj ] is the indicator function and (cid:107) si − sj (cid:107) is
the norm of the color difference between superpixels. L(si , sj )
is the shared boundary length between superpixels si and sj .
My density segmentation system was modeled after this
system. However, I tested my system with both SVM and
LASSO.

D. Evaluation
The system was evaluted via leave-one-out cross-validation.
Two metrics were used to describe the system: (1) per-pixel
accuracy and (2) the Jaccard index as deﬁned in Equation 1,
which provides a measure of the amount of overlap of the
actual dense region and the predicted dense region.

I I I . R E SU LT S
The system was tested on 19 675x925 pixel mammograms
with two types of features: (1) SIFT features and (2) statistical
features and two different classiﬁers: SVM and LASSO. Un-
fortunately, do to the large size of the images the SIFT feature
extraction resulted in extremely long run times of several days
on the Barley cluster. These jobs were aborted, and results
were not able to be obtained. Additionally, the SVM classiﬁer
resulted in majority rule classiﬁcation. Therefore, the results
are not included here.
Results as shown in Table 1 were obtained with LASSO
classiﬁcation using statistical features with and without CRF
computations included. The results with CRF regularization
were signiﬁcantly lower than those without. Figure 3 shows
examples of segmentation accomplished with my system. The

Fig. 3.
Top left: True density mask; Top right: Prediction from original
system, Jaccard = 0.89; Bottom left: Prediction from modiﬁed system without
CRFs, Jaccard = 0.82, Bottom right: Prediction from modiﬁed system with
CRFs, Jaccard = 0.35

ﬁrst image shows the true segmentation as obtained from the
radiologist. The second, third, and fourth images show seg-
mentations from the square-patch-based system from my prior
work, the modiﬁed system without CRFs, and the modiﬁed
system with CRF, respectively. It is clear from these images
that use of CRFs result in over-segmentation.

4

[6] Baker JA, Kornguth PJ, Floyd CE. Breast
imaging
reporting and data system standardized mammography lex-
icon: observer variability in lesion description. AJR Am J
Roentgenol. 1996Apr.;166(4):7738.
[7] Boyer B, Canale S, Arﬁ-Rouche J, Monzani Q, Wassef
K, Balleyguier C. Variability and errors when applying the
BIRADS mammography classiﬁcation. European journal of
radiology. 2012Apr.5.
[8] Jackson SL, Taplin SH, Sickles EA, Abraham L, Barlow
WE, Carney PA, et al. Variability of interpretive accuracy
among diagnostic mammography facilities. J. Natl. Cancer
Inst. 2009Jun.3;101(11):81427.
[9] Beam CA, Layde PM, Sullivan DC. Variability in the
Interpretation of Screening Mammograms by US Radiolo-
gists: Findings From a National Sample. Arch Intern Med.
1996Jan.22;156(2):20913.
[10] Byng JW, Boyd NF, Fishell E, Jong RA, Yaffe MJ.
Automated analysis of mammographic densities. Phys Med
Biol. 1996May;41(5):90923.
[11] Byng JW, Boyd NF, Fishell E, Jong RA, Yaffe MJ.
The quantitative analysis of mammographic densities. Phys
Med Biol. 1994Oct.;39(10):162938.
[12] Tibshirani RT. Regression Shrinkage and Selection via
the Lasso. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B
(Methodological). Blackwell Publishing for the Royal Statis-
tical Society; 1996Jan.1;58(1):26788.
[13] Achanta, Radhakrishna, et al., SLIC Superpixels Com-
pared to State-of-the-art Superpixel Methods, Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on , vol.34,
no.11, pp.2274-2282, Nov. 2012.
[14] Lowe, D.G., ”Object recognition from local scale-
invariant features,” Computer Vision, 1999. The Proceedings
of the Seventh IEEE International Conference on , vol.2, no.,
pp.1150-1157 vol.2, 1999.
[15] Fulkerson, Brian, et al., ”Class segmentation and object
localization with superpixel neighborhoods,” Computer Vision,
2009 IEEE 12th International Conference on , vol., no.,
pp.670-677, Sept. 29 2009-Oct. 2 2009.

Overall, the modiﬁed system without CRFs showed compa-
rable results than the original system.

IV. CONCLU S ION
Breast density is a key indicator of breast cancer, and as
such, breast density segmentation of mammograms is impor-
tant for assessing cancer risk. My prior work showed some
promising results, but modiﬁcations are necessary for further
improvement. In that view, I have altered the system to obtain
superpixels instead of square patches with the intention of
classifying more homogeneous patches of the image. Second,
I implemented CRF regularization on the predictions obtained
from LASSO.
The current modiﬁcations to the original breast density
segmentation algorithm unfortunately have not resulted in
improvement. However, there are many further improvements
that can be made to increase segmentation accuracy. First,
there are several parameters that can be optimized in the
current system: the number of visual words in the dictionary
(k in k-means), the size of the superpixels (s in the search
window of the SLIC algorithm), and the weight giving the
tradeoff between spatial and intensity components of the SLIC
algorithm (w). Next, implementing the system in a program-
ming language other than the current language (Matlab) could
result in faster processing time. This would allow for obtaining
smaller superpixels as well as extracting more features to
describe the superpixels. Further, other classiﬁers may result
in improved classiﬁcation.

V. ACKNOW L EDG EM EN T S
Dr. Daniel Rubin and fellow PhD student Francisco
Gimenez contributed to the original segmentation system
which was modiﬁed for this work. Dr. Rubin obtained data and
advised the project. Francisco implemented the classiﬁcation
and thresholding code.

V I . R E FERENC E S
[1] Jemal A., et al., Global Cancer Statistics, CA Cancer J
Clin. 2011 Mar-Apr;61(2):134.
[2] Nystrm L, Andersson I, Bjurstam N, Frisell J, Nor-
denskjld B, Rutqvist LE. Long-term effects of mammography
screening: updated overview of the Swedish randomised trials.
Lancet. 2002Mar.16;359(9310):90919.
[3] Smith RA, Saslow D, Sawyer KA, Burke W, Costanza
ME, Evans WP, et al. American Cancer Society Guidelines for
Breast Cancer Screening: Update 2003. CA: A Cancer Journal
for Clinicians. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd; 2003;53(3):14169.
[4] Harvey JA, Bovbjerg VE. Quantitative Assessment of
Mammographic Breast Density: Relationship with Breast Can-
cer Risk1. Radiology. Radiological Society of North America;
2004;230(1):2941.
[5] Nelson HD, Zakher B, Cantor A, Fu R, Grifﬁn
J, O’Meara ES, et al. Risk Factors for Breast Cancer
for Women Aged 40 to 49 Years. Ann.
Intern. Med.
2012Jan.1;156(9):63548.

