Pattern Recognition and Prediction in Equity Market 

 

Lang Lang, Kai Wang 

1. Introduction 
 
In finance, technical  analysis is  a security  analysis discipline used  for  forecasting  the  direction  of prices  through  the 
study  of  past  market  data.  The  technical  analysis  of  the  past  market  data  would  usually  be  focused  in  the  moving 
average  of price,  support  line,  resistance  line  and  charting  patterns. This  type  of  technique  has been widely  among 
the  traders  and  investors  of  the  market.  However,  technical  analysis  has  not  received  the  same  level  of  academic 
scrutiny  and  acceptance  as more  traditional  approaches  such  as  fundamental  analysis.  One  of  the  main  obstacles  is 
the  highly  subjective  nature  of  technical  analysis—the  presence  of  geometric  shapes  in  historical  price  charts  is 
often in the eyes of the beholder. So in this project, we propose to build appropriate quantitative models to recognize 
some  tradable  signals  from  technical  perspective  from  past  data  and  test  the  signals  in  the  equity  market . We  will 
discuss  generating  technical  signals  from  supply  and  demand  perspective,  from  charting  patterns  perspective  and 
from  softmax  classification  perspective.  We  back-tested  these  signals  on  thousands  of  stocks  and  got  fairly  good 
results. 

2. Signal Type One: Support Line and Resistance Line 
 
Support  and  resistance  lines  appear  as  thresholds  to  price  patterns.  They  are  the  respective  lines  where  prices  stop 
moving  down  or  up.  A  support  line  is  the  level  that  a  stock's  price  generally  will  not  fall  below.  It marks  the  price 
level where  there  is adequate demand  to stop, and possibly  to  turn a downtrend higher. A  resistance  line  is  the  level 
above  which  a  stock's  price  typically  will  not  rise.  It  indicates  a  price  level  where  an  adequate  supply  of  stock  is 
available to stop and fend off an uptrend in prices.  

Support and resistance levels can be identified by trend lines. Some traders believe in using pivot point calculations. 

The more often a support/resistance level is "tested" (touched and bounced off by price), the more significance given 

to that specific level. If a price breaks past a support level, that support level often becomes a new resistance level. 

The opposite is true as well, if price breaks a resistance level, it will often find support at that level in the future.  

 

 

Figure 1: Support Line and Resistance Line  

 

1 

Support and  resistance levels are useful in evaluating the stock supply and demand, but the choosing of support line 
and  resistance  line  is  highly  subjective.  To  test  the  signals,  a   quantitative  way  to  detect  support  line  and  resistance 
line  is  proposed  as  follows.  First,  for  any  specific  stock  on  a  specific  day,  smooth  the  past  data  first  to  eliminate 
‘wrong’  local minimums  and maximums brought by market noise  and  find out  ten most  recent  ‘true’ minimum  and 
maximum points. Second, regress over the past ten local minimums and maximums to get slopes of the two lines. In 
our hypothesis, these two lines represents the support and resistance levels and give us signals for trading.  
We use following principles to trade this signal:  
1.  When price rises to around resistance line, short the stock 
2.  When price goes above resistance line, buy the stock and consider the resistance line as the new support 
line 
3.  When price drops to around support line, buy the stock  
4.  When price drops below support line, short the stock and consider the suppo rt line as the new resistance 
line 
Following are sample plots of support/resistance line and  the plot of its trading performance 

Figure 2: Recognizing Support Line and Resistance Line in Matlab 

 

Figure 3: Performance of Support/Resistance Line Signals 
We can see that the return seem to be quite good, with the risk-adjusted return (ir) being 0.036. 

 

2. Signal Type Two: Charting Patterns 
 

Candlesticks are usually composed of the body (black or white), and an upper and a lower shadow (wick): the area 

between the open and the close is called the real body, price excursions above and below the real body are 

called shadows. The wick illustrates the highest and lowest traded prices of a security during the time interval 

represented. The body illustrates the opening and closing trades. If the security closed higher than it opened, the 

body is white or unfilled, with the opening price at the bottom of the body and the closin g price at the top. If the 

security closed lower than it opened, the body is black, with the opening price at the top and the closing price at the 

bottom. A candlestick need not have either a body or a wick.  

 

2 

 

Figure 4: Candlesticks Chart 
The  second  type  of  trading  signals  that we want  to  test  comes directly  from  analyzing  the  candlesticks  chart, which 
represents a  stock’s open price, close price, highest price and lowest price of a day.  Different shapes of candlesticks 
typically  indicate different distributions of price movement. We  can build up programs  to  keep  track of  any  stock’s 
high,  low, open  and  close  and  recognize  different  candlesticks  chart patterns  and  test  them. For  example,  ‘hammer’ 
candlesticks are usually a signal of reversal,  indicating that  the current price  trends may not last long any more. The 
‘hammer’  type  is  characterized  as  having  a  very  long  shadow,  typically  twice  larger  than  the  real  body.  Using 
matlab,  we  are  actually  able  to  test  many  chart  patterns  to  see  if  they  are  informative  in  predicting  the  future. 
Following are figures of ‘hammer’ pattern and its trading performance. 

 Figure 5: ‘Hammer’ Type Candlesticks                 Figure 6: Performance of Charting Pattern Signals 

 

4. Signal Type Three: Softmax Regression and Classification of Future Returns 
 
The  first  two  types  of  signals  that  we  talked  before  are  traditional  technical  analysis  methods.  In  general,  these 
methods work  fine  in  the  sense  that  they usually  reflect some probability  rules. So while we  have a very  large asset 
class  that  we  can  trade  on,  we  can  get  positive  return.  A  third  type  of  technical  signals we  can  think  of  is  from  the 
idea of machine learning class. We all know that equity market is not a complete market, which means that past data 
can  contain  information  about  future. Therefore,  information  like  past prices,  return,  trading  volume, volatility,  etc, 
may  be  useful  if  we  can  ‘learn’  some  patterns  from  them.  Here,  we  choose  to  use  softmax  regression  to model  the 
relationship between future return and past market data. 
The  input  variables  come  from  a  stock’s  one  day  return,  5  days  return,  ratio  of  intraday  high  and  low,  changes  in 
daily  high,  low,  open  and  close  prices  in  two  consecutive  days,  difference  between  morning  volume  and  afternoon 
volume  and  its  daily  changes,  changes  in  one -day  return,  daily  morning  return,  daily  afternoon  return,  change  in 
daily  volume,  ratio  of  afternoon  return  standard  deviation  and  morning  return  standard  deviation,  changes  in 
morning return and afternoon  return in two  days, changes in 5days return in 5 days, and SP&500 return, VIX index, 
daily  top  500  stock  return,  etc.  With  above  information,  we  are  able  to  select  and  construct  24  variables  that  we 
consider to be most informative technical input variables.  

 

3 

We  want  to  use  these  input  variables  to  predict  tomorrow’s  daily  return.  Future  returns  are  classified  into  three 
buckets:  

Positive 
return > 1.5% 

Neutral 
-1.5%   return   1.5% 

Negative 
return < -1.5% 

 
Our goal is to predict which bucket tomorrow’s return  will fall into and design a  trading strategy using the predicted 
values. Therefore, we  implemented softmax regression for this problem (Part of the program comes  from “Exercise: 
Softmax Regression, Stanford UFLDL Tutorial”). 
Softmax regression is a method to solve classification problems in which the response variable y can take on any 
one of k values, i.e.               . 
   , thus: 
For softmax regression model, we assume               is linear with    
  
   
  
     
 
   
By linearity, we only need to consider                as parameters of the model.  
Our hypothesis will out put 

               

 

 

 

    

     

                                                           
   
  
  
     
   
   
    
  
  
  
     
     
     
 
 
 
   
   
   
In other words, our hypothesis will output the estimated probability that                for every value i=1,…,k. 
For parameter fitting, if we have m training samples                                , the log-likelihood can be written as:  
 
                               
   
 

  
   
  
     
 
   
   
   
Thus we can obtain the maximum likelihood estimate of the parameters by maximizing       in terms of   using 
stochastic gradient ascent. 
We  trained  the model  on  a  data  set  of  size  1000,  and  applied out -of-sample  test on 4706  stocks  for 1600 days. The 
accuracy  is  46%,  which  is  slightly  higher  than  random  guess.  Considering  the  equity  market  is   extremely  hard  to 
predict  and  highly  random,  46%  accuracy  in  choosing  one  from  the  three  buckets  is  actually  a  decent  number, 
indicating a positive R-Square between the input variables and dependent variable.  
To  test whether  this  prediction model  is  useful  in  trading  or  not, we  first  assign  a  signal  value  to  the  three  buckets, 
indicating how much to buy or sell a stock:  

          

 

          

 

Positive 
1 

Neutral 
0 

Negative 
-1 

 
The performance of this trading strategy is plotted below:  

 

4 

Figure 6: Performance of Softmax Regression Signal 
We can see that trading signals from softmax regression perform ok, but the return line  is a  little less smooth, which 
means that this method is still not very steady and consistent and can be further improved.  

 

5. Conclusion: 
 
Quantitative  methods  to  model  three  types  of  technical  signals  have  been  discussed  and  back -tested  in  this  paper. 
The performance metric of these three types of signals are summarized as follows:  
Information Ratio 
(Risk-Adjusted Return) 
0.038 
0.030 
0.023 

Support/Resistance Line 
Charting Patterns 
Softmax Regression 

0.512 
0.272 
1.845 

48.6 
80.7 
9.1 

 

Turnover 

Drawdown 

 
We  can  find  that  quantitative  signals  generated  from  traditional  technical  analysis   give  fairly  good  risk-adjusted 
return  and  low  turnover,  but  has  high  drawdown,  while  the  more  modern  technical  signal  generated  by  running  a 
softmax  regression  model  over  many  technical  variables,  gives  slightly  lower  but  still  positive  risk -adjusted  return 
with  high  turnover.  The  application  of  machine  learning  techniques  in  trading  signal  construction  seems  not  to  be 
able  to beat  traditional  techniques,  but  from  the  performance we  can  see  that  this  signal  has value. Considering  that 
modern  methods  use  totally  different  principles  from  traditional  ones,  they  generate  signals  with  very  low 
correlations,  and  thus  add  value  to  one  another.  We  can  improve  the  model  by  selecting  better  and  more  input 
variables for the model as well as researching to assign better signal values in the trading process.  
 
 

Reference 
 
[1] Andrew Ng. Cs229 lecture notes on Softmax Regression. 2012. 
[2] Wikipedia. “Support and resistance”, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Support_and_resistance 
[3] Wikipedia. “Candlestick chart”, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Candlestick_chart  

 

5 

