 
 

 

K-Means Clustering of States in Dual-Beam Optical Trap Assays 

Chao Liu 

December 14, 2012 
 

Abstract 

Dual-beam  optical  trap  is  a  common  biophysics  tool  to  study  proteins  on  the  single-molecule  level.  It  has 
been  used  to  characterize  actin-based  myosin  function  which  forms  the  basis  for  muscle  contractions.  Data 
consisting of  time-position  traces  obtained  from  the  assay  is  currently manually  analyzed  to  discriminate  the 
two  different  states  of  the  actin-myosin  system  [1].  In  order  to  improve  accuracy  and  efficiency,  the 
unsupervised  k-means  clustering  algorithm  is  applied  to  this  classification  problem  using  several  features 
derived  from  the  time-position  traces.  Different  weighted  combinations  of  features  are  evaluated  to  give  the 
best  performance.  The  algorithm  correctly  clusters  simulated  data  with  precision  0.97  and  recall  0.96  and 
also performs very well on real data.  

 
1  Introduction 

At the molecular level, muscles contract when  the motor protein myosin binds to actin and exerts a pull. The 
biophysical  study  of  actin-myosin  interaction  on  the  single-molecule  level  can  be  performed  using  the dual-
beam  optical  trap  assay  [1].  As  shown  in  Figure  1(a),  two  micron-sized  dielectric  beads  in  solution  are 
trapped  under  the  electric  potential  of  two  highly  focused  laser  beams  and  are  connected  to  each  other  by  a 
taut  actin  filament.  They  undergo  Brownian  motion  while  being  confined  in  space  by  the  traps’  potential. 
When  a  myosin  immobilized  to  the  surface  binds  to  the  actin  filament  and  executes  a  stroke  along  the 
filament,  the  attached  beads  experience  an  additional  force  and  are  displaced  from  their  original  position. 
Over  time  while  the  actin-myosin  system  switches  between  bound  and  unbound  states,  detectors  track  and 
record the position of each bead. Various factors can be then extracted from this data, including the length of 
time myosin  is bound  to actin and  the step size  taken by  the myosin motor. These factors are important both 
in  understanding  normal  myosin  behavior  and  in  characterizing  changes  seen  in  diseases  such  as 
cardiomyopathies caused by mutations in cardiac myosin genes [1, 2].  
The critical data analysis step  for dual-beam optical  trap assays  is  thus  the discrimination of bound and 
unbound  states  in  the  recorded  traces. Difficulties  arise  from  low  signal-to-noise  ratio  because  displacement 
due  to  Brownian  motion  is  on  the  same  order  as  that  due  to  myosin  binding  and  stroking  (~10nm)  so  that 
short  binding  events  may  be  misidentified  as  noise  and  vice  versa.  Moreover,  states  are  currently  assigned 
manually [1], a very time-consuming process which also produces large variability in the interpretation of the 
data by different human analyzers.  
The  purpose  of  this  project  is  then  to  improve  the  accuracy  and  efficiency  of  classifying  myosin-actin 
bound and unbound  states  in  dual-beam  optical  trap  assays  by  automating  the  interpretation  of  data  using  k-
means  clustering.  This  unsupervised  learning  algorithm  exploits  multiple  features  extracted  from  the 
recorded trace data, including mean displacements for each bead, standard deviation of displacements, signal 
to  noise,  and  bead-bead  correlation.  Performance  is  first  assessed  on  simulated  data  along  with  feature 
weights selection, then on real data taken in assays of actin filament and cardiac myosin.  

 

1 

2  Data 

Although  a  large  amount  of  data  from  dual-beam  optical  trap  assays  of  the  actin-myosin  system  already 
exists,  there  is  much  variability  in  the  manual  assignment  of  states  due  to  various  factors  in  the  data  not 
completely understood, so that  the “correct  labels” are not entirely known. Therefore  it  is  informative  to  test 
a learning algorithm on cleaner simulated data first.  
Two  tethered  Brownian  motions  representing  displacements  of  the  two  trapped  beads  in  a  dual-beam 
optical  trap  assay  are  simulated  as  prescribed  in  [3],  with  several  modifications.  First,  the  steps  of  the  two 
random  walks  are  sampled  from  a  bivariate  Gaussian  distribution  with  nonzero  covariance  in  order  to 
incorporate  the  correlation  in  displacements  of  two  connected  beads  [1].  The  variances  of  the  two 
displacements are assumed equal but can be readily adjusted. Second, in  the bound state,  the values used  for 
both  the covariance and variances are  lowered as observed  in  real data [1].  In addition, a fixed displacement 
representing  the  stroke  taken  by  myosin  is  added  to  each  bead’s  Brownian  motion  during  the  bound  state. 
This  simple  addition  does  not  entirely  capture  the  physical  details  but  should  suffice  for  the  purpose  of 
simulation  to  test  the  learning  algorithm.  Finally,  the  durations  of  bound  and  unbound  states  are  sampled 
from  two  exponential  distributions  with  means  expected  of  the  waiting  times  of  myosin  unbinding  and 
binding,  respectively. The much  longer  average  duration  of  the unbound  state  is mainly  due  to  the diffusion 
limited rate of myosin binding. Key parameters used are summarized in Table 1. Several hundred bound and 
unbound events are generated. A short segment of simulated data is shown in Figure 1(b).  
One set of real data containing roughly 60 binding and unbinding events taken from a dual-beam optical 
trap  assay  of  actin  filament  and  cardiac  myosin  is  provided  by  Professor  Jim  Spudich’s  lab  in  Stanford’s 
Biochemistry department. A short segment  is shown  in Figure 1(c). Note  that here  the displacement  induced 
by the bound state is negative and, more importantly, that it is difficult to consistently manually assign states 
due to the much greater complexity present in real data but not in simulated data. 

3  Methodology 

The generated displacement-time data of the two beads is first evenly binned in time so that five features can 
be calculated for each bin: mean displacement of bead 1, mean displacement of bead 2, standard deviation of 
bead 1 displacement, standard deviation of bead 2 displacement, and correlation between bead 1 and 2 . Two 
additional features, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of bead 1 and SNR of bead 2, are then calculated for each bin 
as the mean displacement divided by the standard deviation. A choice of thirty to fifty raw displacement data 
points  per  bin  easily  results  in  several  thousand  bins,  or  examples,  depending  on  the  amount  of  data  used. 
Thus the training set consists of several thousand examples, each given as a seven-element feature vector. 
The  k-means  clustering  algorithm  is  then  applied  to  the  examples,  with  k = 2 ,  to  group  them  into  two 
clusters  representing  the  bound  and  unbound  state.  The  two  cluster  centroids  are  initialized  by  setting  their 
values  equal  to  the  features  of  two  randomly  chosen  examples.  Each  iteration  of  the  algorithm  then  (i) 
assigns examples  to the closer cluster centroid and (ii) moves each cluster centroid  to  the mean of the points 
assigned to it. Convergence is achieved when the cluster centroids no longer change significantly.  
In  applying  k-means  clustering  to  the  dual-beam  optical  trap  problem,  a  few  adjustments  are  made. 
Before  calculating  the  distance  between  an  example  and  a  cluster  centroid  in  step  (i)  of  each  iteration,  each 
feature, whose magnitude may be on a very different scale from  that of other  features,  is  first normalized by 
its  standard  deviation  across  all  examples.  This  prevents  uncontrolled  bias  of  cluster  assignment  based  on 
large-valued  features.  After  this  rescaling,  each  feature  may  be  assigned  a  weight  based  on  empirical 
knowledge  of  how  informative  it  is  to  cluster  discrimination .  The  same  normalization  and  weighting  of  a 
feature are applied to all examples.  
After  k-means  clustering  has  grouped  the  data  into  two  clusters,  the  labels  “unbound”  and  “bound”  are 
assigned simply based on prior knowledge of each state’s characteristics.  

 

2 

4  Results 

Results  of  k-means  clustering  of  simulated  data  are  given  in  Figure  2.  Figure  2(a)  shows  the  clusters  found 
using  only  the  features  mean  displacement  1  and  2,  giving  precision  0.91  and  recall  0.99.  False  positives 
occur  at  the  boundary  of  the  two  states, caused  partly by  the  closeness  of clusters  and by  the highly  skewed 
cluster sizes, showing that using only the mean displacements, essentially thresholding, to perform clustering 
is  not  sufficient.  Table  2  presents  the  result  of  using  various  different  weighted  combinations  of  the  seven 
features.  This  reveals  that  the  means  and  SNR’s  are  very  relevant  features  yielding  high  accuracy  as 
compared  to  standard  deviations  and  correlation.  However,  the  best  performance  with  both  high  precision 
and  recall  is  achieved  by  a  weighted  combination  of  all  seven  features,  with  means  and  SNR’s  having  the 
largest weights.  Figure  2(b)  displays  the  clusters  found  using  this  optimal weighted  combination,  producing 
precision 0.97 and recall 0.96. 
Results  of  k-means  clustering  of  real  data  are  given  in  Figure  3.  Figure  3(a)  shows  the  clusters  found 
using the optimal weighted combination of all seven features as determined in testing simulated data. Despite 
the complexity of real data, the learning algorithm has successfully discriminated two states by exploiting the 
features.  Precision  and  recall  are  not  calculated  because  the  correct  labels  are  not  known  unless  a  human 
subjectively  assigns  them.  Nevertheless,  a  qualitative  inspection  of  the  assignments  by  the  learning 
algorithm, given by a plot of a short segment of raw displacement-time trace in Figure 3(b), suggests that the 
correct classifications have indeed been made. 

5  Conclusion and Future Work  

Current manual assignment of bound and unbound states  in data taken from dual-beam optical trap assays of 
the  actin-myosin  system  is  inconsistent  and  time  consuming.  Therefore  an  automated  data  processing  is  in 
need. The k-means clustering algorithm has been  successfully  implemented and tested on simulated data and 
produces  high  accuracy  by  exploiting  a  weighted  combination  of  features  available.  It  is  observed  to  also 
perform  surprisingly  well  on  real  data  despite  the  significant  increase  in  the  complexity  of  real  data  due  to 
various noisy factors ignored in simulation. Based on these results, successful application of this algorithm to 
real  data  in  future work  is promising. To  this  end,  the  advantage  of unsupervised  clustering  over  supervised 
learning is its adaptability. Different data sets taken from trap assays can give different characteristics such as 
standard  deviation,  displacement  due  to  different  stroke  direction  and  size,  and  other  variables.  While  a 
supervised learning algorithm restricts these values owing to its learning of specific feature values associated 
with known labels, the k-means unsupervised clustering readily group examples in any given data set.  

Acknowledgements  

I would like to thank Jongmin Sung from the Spudich group for the helpful discussions and for providing the 
real data.  

References 

[1]  Sung  J,  Sivaramakrishnan  S,  Dunn  AR,  Spudich  JA.  (2010).  Single-molecule  dual-beam  optical  trap 
analysis of protein structure and function. Methods Enzymol. 475, 321-75. 

[2]  Palmiter KA, Tyska MJ, Haeberle JR, Alpert NR, Fananapazir L, and Warshaw DM. (2000). R403Q and 
L908V  mutant  beta-cardiac  myosin  from  patients  with  familial  hypertrophic  cardiomyopathy  exhibit 
enhanced mechanical performance at the single molecule level. J. Muscle Res. Cell Motil. 21, 609–620. 

[3]  Beausang JF, et al. (2007). Elementary simulation of tethered Brownian motion. Am. J. Phys. 75, 520-23. 

 

 

3 

 

a 

Position sensitive detectors 

IR laser beam 

Actin filament 

Optically trapped beads 

Myosin 

GFP 
antibody 

Immobilized platform bead 

 

b 

c 

 
Figure  1. Dual-beam  optical  trap  assay  for  study  of myosin.  a) Experimental  setup. Drawing  not  to 
scale.  Figure  taken  from  [1].  b)  A  short  segment  of  simulated  displacement  over  time  of  the  two 
trapped beads (red and blue). Binding and stroke events are simulated as positive displacements and 
shown in black. c) A short segment of real data taken from dual-beam optical trap assay of actin and 
cardiac  myosin,  provided  by  the  Spudich  lab.  Bead  1  and  2  displacements  shown  in  blue  and  red. 
Binding and stroke events in this data correspond to negative displacements. Labels of “bound” and 
“unbound” states are not clear due to the greater complexity of real data. 

 

Stroke size 
Mean unbound time 
Mean bound time 
Brownian bias 

7 nm 
0.1 s 
18 ms 
0.3 

Variance_unbound 
Covariance_unbound 
Variance_bound 
Covariance_bound 

1 
0.4 
0.5 
0.1 

Table 1. Key parameters used in simulation of two coupled tethered Brownian motion  

 

4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

00.050.10.150.20.250.3-20-15-10-505101520Time (s)Displacement (nm)Simulated Coupled Optical Traps  Bead 1Bead 2Binding and stroke events00.050.10.150.20.250.3-30-20-100102030Time (s)Displacement (nm)Displacement of Beads in a Dual-Beam Optical Trap Assay  Bead 1Bead 2 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a 

b 

 
Figure  2.  Result  of  k-means  clustering  on  simulated  data,  displayed  by  plotting  the  feature  mean 
displacements. Bound in green, unbound in red, FP (false positive) in blue, FN (false negative) in black. 
a) Using  only mean  displacements  of  bead  1  and  2.  Precision =  0.91. Recall = 0.99.  b) Using  all  seven 
features, weighted, where wmean = 1, wsd = 0.3, wsnr = 0.7, wcorr = 0.2. Precision = 0.97. Recall = 0.96. 

 

wmean 
1 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 

wsd 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0.3 

wsnr 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0.7 

wcorr 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0.2 

Precision 
0.91 
0.25 
0.99 
0.23 
0.97 
0.97 

Recall 
0.99 
0.89 
0.92 
0.58 
0.91 
0.96 

Table 2. Results of k-means clustering on simulated data using weighted features 

 
 

b 

 

 

a 

Figure  3. Result  of  k-means  clustering  on  real  data.  a) Display  of  clusters  by  plotting  the  feature mean 
displacements.  Predicted  bound  in  green,  unbound  in  red. All  seven  features  used  and weighted, where 
wmean =  1, wsd =  0.3, wsnr =  0.7, wcorr =  0.2.  b) A  short  segment  of  raw  trace  of  bead  1  displacement with 
assignment of bound state in green and unbound state in red. Displacement has been scaled for display. 

5 

-10-5051015-8-6-4-2024681012Averaged displacement 1 (nm)Averaged displacement 2 (nm)Bead 1 vs. 2 Averaged Displacements - Predicted  BoundUnboundFPFN-10-5051015-8-6-4-2024681012Averaged displacement 1 (nm)Averaged displacement 2 (nm)Bead 1 vs. 2 Averaged Displacements - Predicted  BoundUnboundFPFN-25-20-15-10-50510-30-25-20-15-10-505101520Averaged displacement 1 (nm)Averaged displacement 2 (nm)Bead 1 vs. 2 Averaged Displacements - Predicted  BoundUnbound33.13.23.33.43.53.63.73.83.901Time (s)Bound(1) or Unbound(0)Bead 1 Displacement and Predicted States  Scaled DataPredicted BoundPredicted Unbound