Automated Analysis of Calcium Imaging Data 
Helen Horan Yang 
CS229 Final Project, Fall 2012 
 
Introduction 
In virtually all biological systems, calcium ions (Ca2+) are essential intracellular signaling 
molecules, but they are particularly important in the nervous system. Ca2+ is required for neurons to 
release synaptic vesicles, which is the major method by which they communicate with downstream 
neurons. Measuring increases in Ca2+ concentration around these release sites is therefore a readout 
of the neuron’s output signaling, and one can correlate this to particular stimuli presented to 
characterize the neuron’s response properties (Grienberger and Konnerth, 2012).  This information is 
important for understanding how neural circuits respond to and shape the signals that they receive from 
the environment to perform complex computations.  
Calcium imaging is the technique by which one measures these changes in cellular Ca2+ levels. 
 
Briefly, cells are made to contain a calcium indicator, a molecule that fluoresces only when it binds 
Ca2+; fluorescence intensity is thereby a report of Ca2+ concentration and the cells’ responses. This is 
captured in real time with a fluorescence microscope and a CCD camera. Raw calcium imaging data is 
in the form of a time series of images where the intensity of each pixel is the fluorescence intensity at 
that location (Grienberger and Konnerth, 2012). However, the unit of interest is a cell, not a pixel, and 
typical calcium imaging experiments capture several to several dozen cells in one field of view. To be 
able to make meaningful biological conclusions, each cell’s responses must be isolated from other 
cells’ and the background.  
 
Despite the recent advances in calcium imaging technology to improve the performance of both 
calcium indicators and fluorescence microscopes (Grienberger and Konnerth, 2012), the extraction of 
cellular responses is mostly performed by manually or semiautomatedly selecting regions of interest 
(ROIs) that correspond to single cells—tracing cell outlines or setting an intensity threshold, for 
example—(Göbel and Helmchen, 2007; Ozden et al., 2008). Not only is this time consuming, it can 
introduce noise into the signal if the boundaries of the ROI are not precise and include other cells or 
background. In some situations, spatial overlap is unavoidable as the microscope captures 
fluorescence from cells slightly above or below the imaging plane of focus. More clever analysis 
techniques for isolating cells should be able to improve performance and decrease the amount of 
human labor required. 
 
For this project, I have applied machine learning algorithms to automatically extract cellular 
responses from my own calcium imaging data, which I was previously isolating by manually outlining 
ROIs.  
 
Data Acquisition and Preprocessing 
 
The analyses described below were performed on data collected by imaging a particular cell 
type in the fruit fly Drosophila visual system known as L2. L2 receives direct input from photoreceptors 
and functions as an input to a pathway specialized to detect moving dark edges (Clark et al., 2011).  
 
Briefly, single flies were stably mounted such that their eyes viewed a screen on which visual 
stimuli were presented, and the back of the head was exposed to allow the microscope objective 
access to the brain for imaging. The calcium indicator TN-XXL was expressed specifically in L2; that is, 
the flies were genetically engineered such that their L2 cells made the TN-XXL protein. L2 axon 
terminals in the medulla (the neuronal output sites located in a particular brain region) were imaged 
using two-photon fluorescence microscopy (two longer wavelength photons must be absorbed 
simultaneously for one to be emitted). When stimulated at 830nm, TN-XXL emits at ~529nm when it is 
bound to Ca2+ and ~475nm when it is not (Mank et al., 2008). Both channels were collected during 
imaging and are hereafter referred to as ch1 and ch2, respectively; TN-XXL is therefore ratiometric, and 
a cell’s Ca2+ response is characterized by ch1/ch2.  
 
Imaging data was acquired at a constant frame rate of 10.3Hz using a frame size of 50 x 200 
pixels. This field of view fits approximately 6 to 8 L2 terminals. The presented visual stimulus was a 
light bar with a width of ~2.5° of the fly’s visual field moving in one direction at ~10°/sec on a dark 

background. The bar was oriented either horizontally and moving vertically or vice versa. The screen 
was dark for 9 seconds and then the bar moved across the screen in 9 seconds; the bar moved in all 4 
possible direction-orientation combinations. 1000 imaging frames were captured while the stimulus was 
presented. 
 
Although the fly is mounted to minimize movement, it is not completely eliminated. Before any 
analysis was performed, lateral movement artifacts were corrected for by aligning the image time series 
using an ImageJ macro based on TurboReg, which matches images based on distinctive landmarks 
(Thévenaz et al., 1998). Alignment was done using ch1, in which cellular structures are more apparent, 
and ch2 images were shifted to match. 
 
Analyses 
Manual Selection of Regions of Interest 
 
Before discussing the approaches I took to automatically extract cellular signals from the 
aligned image time series, I will first describe the method I had previously been using.  
 
The ch1 aligned image time series was collapsed along the temporal dimension by averaging 
the intensity at each pixel to generate an average image. ROIs corresponding to individual L2 terminals 
were identified by eye and manually outlined. A background region in which no cellular fluorescence 
was apparent was also manually defined. For each cell and the background region, the fluorescence 
intensities were averaged across all of the pixels in the ROI for each frame to generate average ch1 
and ch2 time series. The average response of the background region was subtracted from each cell’s 
responses, and then the ratio between the two channels was determined. The end result is that the 
calcium response of each L2 cell is described by a single time series of ch1/ch2 ratio values. These 
ratios generally range between 2 and 3. Figure 1 shows a typical example of the responses derived 
from 7 cells in one field of view. 

 

Figure 1 Responses of cel ls identified by 
manual selection of ROIs.  
(A) Average image for ch1. 
(B) In color are  the ROIs correspond ing to 
ind ividual L2  terminals. The white ROI is 
background reg ion. 
(C) Responses o f the cells spatially defined in 
(B). The colors of the ROIs and traces 
correspond. The color traces are  the ch1/ch2  
ratio va lues, and the desaturated traces behind  
them are the ch1 and ch2  responses before the  
ratio is taken. The step  function at the bottom 
describes the stimulus, with each different value 
corresponding to a different direction that the bar 
moves. Each L2 observes a poin t in space and 
the moving bar.	  
responds by decreasing and  then increasing its 
Ca2+ concentration when the bar crosses this 
region. Adjacen t cells respond to  adjacent po ints 
in space. Black arrows denote the responses to 

 
 

 
K-means for Region of Interest Identification  
 
As stated above, the goal of this project is to automatically extract cellular responses from an 
aligned image time series. For the greatest utility, the method taken should be able to identify these 
responses using the image time series and as few additional parameters—which must be manually 
tuned—as possible; furthermore, it should perform comparably to or better than manual ROI selection. 
This is therefore an unsupervised learning problem. That is, I could train a supervised learning 

algorithm to identify ROIs by using the set of manually defined ROIs and average images I have 
already collected, but this would require a large time investment if I wanted to examine other cells in the 
fly visual system (and there certainly exist cells with similar response properties but different 
morphologies) or if I do not have enough L2 training data and is unlikely to perform substantially better 
than manual ROI identification. 
 
I applied the k-means clustering algorithm to the aligned image time series data. The image 
time series data was collapsed from 50 x 200 x 1000, representing spatial width x height x time, to a 
10,000 x 1000 matrix, representing pixels x time. That is, each of the m=10,000 pixels is a training 
example x(i) and is described by n=1000 variables, the value at each time point. Applied to this training 
set, k-means identifies clusters of similar pixels, which would ideally correspond to individual cells and 
the background. These can then be analyzed in the same way as the manually identified ROIs to 
extract the cellular responses.   
 
I first performed k-means on the 
raw intensities of the ch1 image time 
series using k=10 clusters for the 6-8 
cells and the background. 
Disappointingly, the clusters did not 
correspond to individual terminals but 
instead to similar regions in each of 
terminals (Figure 2A). The identified 
regions were vaguely similar to the 
intensity gradients across the cells in the 
average image, so I hypothesized that 
similarities among pixels corresponding 
to a single cell were overwhelmed by 
differences in the raw intensities within a 
cell. I therefore calculated the ratio 
between ch1 and ch2 for each pixel at 
each time point and performed k-means 
on this training set. While this did seem 
to eliminate the effects of raw intensity 
differences, the clusters were still 
spread among multiple cells and 
showed no apparent pattern within a 
single cell terminal (Figure 2B).  
 
However, this did clearly 
separate the cells from the background, 
so I repeated the clustering with k=2, 
which did indeed form a cell cluster and 
a background cluster (Figure 2C). In the 
cell cluster, all contiguous pixels were 
grouped together, and any regions 
exceeding 100 pixels in area were 
called cell ROIs (Figure 2D). The 
extraction of cellular responses from 
these spatial ROIs was performed as 
above (Figure 2E). This method of 
identifying ROIs performed comparably 
to the manual method over many data 
sets, not just the one shown in Figure 2; 
in fact, the cells’ responses to the 
moving bar seem to be more apparent 
in these traces, possibly because they 
are less noisy—the standard deviation 

Figure 2 ROIs and cellular responses identified by k-
means clustering. 
(A) Clusters identified by performing  k-means on ch1 raw 
intensities. Each gray scale va lue is a  different cluster. k=10 
(B) Clusters identified from ch1/ch2 ratios. k=10 
(C) C lusters when k=2 . Cluster 1 (black) was used as the 
background and cell ROIs were extracted from cluster 2 (white). 
(D) ROIs called as ind ividual cells overlayed on the average 
ch1 image. 
(E) Responses of the cells defined  in  (D). Compared to Figure 
1C, the responses to the moving bar (black arrows) are more  
apparent. 

of the ch1/ch2 ratios for each k-means trace was less than that of the manual trace for the same cell 
(mean difference -0.0691, n=56 cells). 
 
Spatiotemporal Independent Component Analysis 
 
Identifying ROIs using k-means clustering is an improvement compared to manual ROI 
selection; however, averaging over ROIs collapses any spatial variability or noise in favor of extracting 
a purely temporal response. Calcium imaging data can be thought of as a mixture in both space and 
time of signals from statistically independent sources—that is, cells; extraction of these sources would 
thereby provide an estimate of the cells’ locations and responses. Unlike ROI analysis, these signals 
are constrained to be independent and should therefore have less noise from crosstalk in either time or 
space. 
 
Independent component analysis (ICA) can be used to isolate signals from independent 
sources. In the cocktail party example we discussed in class, the goal was to separate out individual 
speakers captured on multiple microphones. Specifically, the speakers were the independent 
component sources to be isolated, and the corresponding acoustic signal over time was the signal of 
interest; the goal was not to isolate independent time points, each of which has an acoustic signal over 
all of the microphones. However, calcium imaging data is a time series of images and the 
decompositions corresponding to both situations in the cocktail party example make sense and 
generate a set of images and a set of intensity changes over time. Spatial ICA (sICA) seeks a set of 
mutually independent source images and a corresponding set of unconstrained time courses; temporal 
ICA (tICA) seeks a set of independent source time courses and a corresponding set of unconstrained 
images. However, because either space or time is unconstrained, the resulting independent 
components can be biologically improbable. Spatiotemporal ICA (stICA) maximizes the independence 
of both space and time, weighting one α and the other α-1 where α is between 0 and 1 (Stone et al., 
2002), and is ideal for calcium imaging where the goal is to isolate independent component cells that 
each have their own spatial location and responses. 
 
Following the methods of Mukamel et al. and Stone et al. for stICA using the FastICA algorithm 
(Hyvärinen and Oja, 2000), I performed stICA on X = the 10,000 x 1000 matrix of ch1/ch2 ratios. 
Briefly, X was preprocessed such that each row and 
each column had zero mean, and it was whitened 
using singular value decomposition, which reduces 
the number of parameters to be estimated 
(Hyvärinen and Oja, 2000). stICA was performed 
with α=0.5 to equally weight the independence of 
time and space.  
The resulting spatial filter and time course of 
the first independent component is shown in Figure 
3. The filter does not correspond to a cell, and the 
response over time does not resemble that 
observed with ROI analysis. The other independent 
components are similar. Thinking that perhaps 
independence in space or time is more significant 
(e.g. there is minimal spatial overlap among the 
cells), I varied α, including α=0 and 1 for pure sICA 
and tICA. While the independent components 
changed, they did not obviously resemble cells and 
cellular responses more. I also performed ICA with 
subsets of the principal components; that is, 
whitening transforms X such that its components 
are uncorrelated, which is exactly the 
transformation performed in principal component 
analysis. This can often reduce noise and prevent 
overfitting (Hyvärinen and Oja, 2000) but with this 
data, did not noticeably improve the algorithm’s 

Figure 3 Spatial filter and time course of the 
first independent component of stICA 
analysis on ch1/ch2 ratios. 
(A) Spatial filter 
(B) Response trace  

performance. This is likely because none of the principal components explained a large percentage of 
the variance or contained signals that were obviously non-biological. ch1/ch2 ratios are occasionally 
abnormally large when a particular ch2 value drops close to zero, so I also tried ICA on data for which 
any data point that exceeded a threshold was set to that threshold. This eliminated the large spikes 
observed in Figure 3B but did not significantly change the spatial filters or make the time courses look 
more like the cellular responses. Finally, I used the ΔF/F (for each pixel, divide by its mean value over 
time and then subtract 1) of ch1 as X; this is the normalization used when the calcium indicator is not 
ratiometric and simply fluoresces when it binds Ca2+ and does not when it does not bind. Again, this did 
not improve performance. I tried various combinations of the above-described variations, but none of 
them resulted in an algorithm that extracted cellular responses. 
 
Discussion 
 
Mukamel et al. used stICA to extract cellular responses from calcium imaging data, but I was 
unable to do so successfully. I hypothesize that this is because my data was collected using a different 
calcium indicator, which has a much lower signal to noise ratio (SNR). Mukamel et al. used Oregon 
Green 488 BAPTA-1-AM, which is known to have greater amplitude responses than TN-XXL 
(Grienberger and Konnerth, 2012). The responses shown in Figures 1C and 2E are typical for this 
experiment, and examining those, it is apparent that the amplitudes of the responses to the moving 
bars does not significantly exceed the amplitude of the noise (SNR ~1). In contrast, Mukamel et al. are 
working with signal to noise ratios one to two orders of magnitude greater than this. Along these same 
lines, it is also possible that their cells respond more strongly to their stimulus than L2 cells to moving 
bars. Either way, I hypothesize that the ICA algorithm cannot extract meaningful cellular responses 
when these responses are difficult to distinguish random fluctuations. Perhaps increasing the imaging 
time or using a stimulus that causes the cells to respond more often would improve the performance, 
since there will be more responses, but that would not be useful given my experimental criteria. 
 
Nevertheless, I used k-means to identify ROIs corresponding to individual cells and could 
extract cellular responses in this manner. Compared to manually selecting the cells, this significantly 
reduces the amount of human labor required; the only parameter that needs to be specified is the 
minimum area of a cell, which can be set just once since L2 terminals are all approximately the same 
size. Furthermore, performs slightly better in that the traces have less baseline noise. Overall, this 
method improves how I analyze my calcium imaging data. 
 
References 
Clark, D.A., Bursztyn, L., Horowitz, M.A., Schnitzer, M.J., and Clandinin, T.R. (2011). Defining the computational 
structure of the motion detector in Drosophila. Neuron 70, 1165–1177. 
Göbel, W., and Helmchen, F. (2007). In vivo calcium imaging of neural network function. Physiology (Bethesda) 
22, 358–365. 
Grienberger, C., and Konnerth, A. (2012). Imaging calcium in neurons. Neuron 73, 862–885. 
Hyvärinen, A., and Oja, E. (2000). Independent component analysis: algorithms and applications. Neural Netw 13, 
411–430. 
Mank, M., Santos, A.F., Direnberger, S., Mrsic-Flogel, T.D., Hofer, S.B., Stein, V., Hendel, T., Reiff, D.F., Levelt, 
C., Borst, A., et al. (2008). A genetically encoded calcium indicator for chronic in vivo two-photon imaging. Nat. 
Methods 5, 805–811. 
Mukamel, E.A., Nimmerjahn, A., and Schnitzer, M.J. (2009). Automated analysis of cellular signals from large-
scale calcium imaging data. Neuron 63, 747–760. 
Ozden, I., Lee, H.M., Sullivan, M.R., and Wang, S.S.-H. (2008). Identification and clustering of event patterns 
from in vivo multiphoton optical recordings of neuronal ensembles. J. Neurophysiol. 100, 495–503. 
Stone, J.V., Porrill, J., Porter, N.R., and Wilkinson, I.D. (2002). Spatiotemporal independent component analysis 
of event-related fMRI data using skewed probability density functions. NeruoImage. 15, 407-421. 
Thévenaz P., Ruttimann U.E., and Unser, M. (1998). A pyramid approach to subpixel registration based on 
intensity. IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, 7, 27-41. 

