CS229 Predicting Transcription Factor binding
Authors:
Jon Tatum (jdtatum)
Daniel Williams (danielhw)
Zoey Zhou (cuizy)

Advisor: Sofia Kyriazopoulou-Panagiotopoulou (sofiakp@stanford.edu)
Introduction
Since scientists have successfully determined the DNA sequence of the human genome, the 
next step is to understand the roles of the different regions, especially of gene regulation. The 
transcription activity of a gene can be controlled by transcription factors (TF), proteins that bind 
to specific DNA sequences and either promotes or represses the transcription of the nearby 
DNA to mRNA. (1) The DNA sequences these transcription factors are likely to bind are called 
motifs, and the ENCODE consortium has listed some known motifs derived from experimental 
datasets. 
With just the knowledge of the DNA sequence, it is not enough to predict which regulatory sites 
will be bound and the effects it has in overall gene regulation. Indeed our bodies are composed 
of many different cell types that have different gene expressions profiles according to cell type, 
but all stem from the same copy of our DNA. What b iological factors can predict TF binding can 
allow us to better understand the basic biological mechanisms and perhaps make new 
discoveries. In addition, understanding how gene regulation changes in different cell types and 
especially in diseased cell states is essential. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation with massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) is the standard 
assay for genome-wide detection of TF binding locations for a specific TF. However the 
limitations are that ChIP-seq can only detect one TF a time over one cell type when the reality is 
that hundreds of TFs are binding and regulating DNA transcription. Using machine learning 
methods to predict TF binding can potentially allow us to compare across numerous different 
TFs as well as across cell type. In addition to using ChIP-seq data, we incorporate other 
biologically relevant data such as DNase 1 sensitivity. Chromatin usually exists in the cell as 
complicated structures tightly bound with histones that prohibit transcription. DNase activity 
indicates whether it is an open region of chromatin that TFs can bind to. (2) We use machine 
learning with supervised learning and features extracted from ChIP-seq and DNase activity data 
to make predictions about TF activity in different cell types.
Methods
Text extraction
Specific base-pairs that are referenced in ChiP-seq peaks can be extracted using the hg19r 
eference genome. Our ChiP-seq peak data provides the location of the peak and a window of 
the 1001bp surrounding the peak. With the chromosome number and position, we can access 
the DNA sequence in FASTA format using the hg19 genome. (5) This format accounts for 

possible variations in the DNA such as SNPs. Given the size of the reference genome, this must 
be done efficiently. Initially, we attempted loading the genome into memory. Because the 
genome is so large (> 3x109 base-pairs) we found that our development machines couldn't 
handle this. This led us to use random disk accesses to extract the sequences. This proves very 
expensive, but only needs to happen once for each unique peak location.

Motif finding
First, we extract the DNA sequence corresponding to high CTCF binding levels using the 
reference genome and ChiP-seq peak coordinates. Initially, we used all 532 ENCODE motifs, and 
their associated PSSMs (position-specific-scoring matrices) to find motif matches on the DNA 
sequence for each peak. These matches are only dependent on the DNA sequence. The PSSMs 
relate a notion of how likely a sequence is compatible with a molecule that binds to DNA. We 
used the log of this likelihood as a feature. On advice from our advisor, we used only the 239 
features that have been experimentally determined to affect TF binding (the remaining 293 
have been statistically determined) . This is also expensive: for each peak and motif, we need to 
calculate the PSSM score for all subsequences[ie s(1,6),s(2,7) …]. 

DNase and Histone modifications
Since DNase activity indicates if the chromatin is open (ie. transcription factors can bound in 
that region), high cumulative DNase levels should correlate with TF binding. In addition, the 
acetylation and methylation state of various histones are also an indicator of the shape of the 
DNA chromatin complex and if transcription factor binding is promoted or repressed. We used 
histones H3k27, H3k4, H3k9 and H3k36 in various states as features because there are prior 
studies indicating related activity and also because it is available. (7) DNase and histone data is 
also available in the form of subsamples over 10bp regions in the 1001bp region around peak 
CTCF TF binding. From this, we extract the maximum and median signal of each as features.

Machine Learning
Using 1000 positive sets of high ChIP-seq scoring peaks and 1000 negative sets of low ChIP-seq 
scoring peaks of the Gm12878 lymphoblastoid cell line from a donor, we trained both a linear 
SVM and a logistic binary classifier. The feature vector we used includes the maximum log 
probability for a set of motifs matching a given subsequence in the peak, the maximum and the 
median of the DNAse signal and chromatin protein signal.  The linear SVM was implemented 
with the liblinear SVM software and logistic regression was implemented using the matlab 
native command glmval and glmfit. 
We tested our model on 100 negative and 100 positive data points from the K562 cell line, from 
a leukemia patient.

Results
We found that our models performed relatively well. We first included only the motif likelihood 
and DNase signals as features.  With Linear SVM, we obtained 81% test set accuracy. With the 
logistic regression model the test set accuracy was increased to 90%. This provides evidence 
that the model fits the data relatively well. The highest weighted features were the max and 
median DNAse score. This indicates that openness of the chromosome is one of the most 
important factors determining whether a transcription factor may bind.

We then implemented the same machine learning methods with the additional data from the 
various histone states that are known to be associated with transcription.  With the inclusion of 
the new features, the training set accuracy did not differ much from the previous learned 
models, however the test set accuracy was dramatically improved with the linear SVM model 
producing a test set accuracy of 92% and the logistic regression model with a test set accuracy 
of 97%.  It could be that the model learned worked particularly well with the K562 cell line we 
used as the test data.

In general the logistic regression model seems to be a better fit for predicting transcription 
factor binding.  This is most likely due to the features contributing non-linearly to the binary 
classifier.  We also implemented a radial basis kernel SVM method, however the accuracy was 
poor, only 67% even after cross-validation to find the best parameters, thus this model was 
excluded for our final evaluation.

We found that the motif scores with the greatest influence were ets_known8 and SP1. The 
presence of ets_known8 indicates that CTCF binding is unlikely whereas SP1 indicates that CTCF 
binding is likely.

% Accuracy

training data test data

linear SVM

88%

logistic regression 90%

88%

81%

precision recall F1 score

linear SVM

74.8%

94% 83.3

logistic regression 83.9%

94% 88.7

Including data from other histone factors:
training data test data
% Accuracy

linear SVM

85%

logistic regression 90%

92%

97%

precision recall F1 score

linear SVM

90.4%

94% 92.2

logistic regression 83.9%

100% 91.2

Conclusion
Chromatin immunoprecipitation with massively parallel sequencing (ChIP-seq) is the standard
assay for genome-wide detection of TF binding locations for a specific TF. However the
limitations are that ChIP-seq can only detect one TF a time over one cell type when the reality is
that hundreds of TFs are binding and regulating DNA transcription. In addition to using ChIP-seq 
data, we incorporated other biologically relevant data such as DNase 1 sensitivity and histone 
modification, which indicates the availability of chromatin structures for transcription. Using
linear SVM and logistic regression machine learning methods, we can predict TF binding in a 
different cell type with good accuracy. In particular, logistic regression was a good model for 
this biological application.

Future Research
In addition to the set of features outlined above, it may be worthwhile to consider more rich 
features. For example: we could include the relative position of Motifs with respect to the peak.
Additionally, it would be worthwhile to consider different models for this problem.  
Furthermore we can check for the biological significance of our prediction algorithm, by 
comparing if the predicted positive and negative TF binding regions existed in the training cell 
data, and the relation between transcription of benign and cancerous cells.
Acknowledgments
Our advisor, Sofia Kyriazopoulou-Panagiotopoulou suggested the project. She was an immense 
help throughout the process: she provided general guidance throughout the process, supplied
the datasets that were used in this project, and provided many references for background 
knowledge.

Works Cited

1. 1. Cheng C, Alexander R, Min R, et al 2012. Understanding transcriptional regulation 
by integrative analysis of transcription factor binding data. Genome Research 
22:1658-1667
2. Natarajan A, Yardimci GG, Sheffield NC, Crawford GE, Ohler U 2012. Predicting cell-
type–specific gene expression from regions of open chromatin. Genome Research 
22:1711-1722
3. Thurman RE, et al 2012. The accessible chromatin landscape of the human genome. 
Nature 489: 75-82
4. Pique-Regi R, Degner JF et al 2011. Accurate inference of transcription factor binding 
from DNA sequence and chromatin accessibility data. Genome Research 21(3): 447–
455.
single letter codes for nucleotides. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/staff/tao/tools/tool_lettercode.html
6. Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin, LIBSVM : a library for support vector machines. 
ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2:27:1--27:27, 2011. 
Software available at http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm
7. Histone code. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Histone_code

5.

