Characterizing Dark Matter Concentrations Through Magnitude
Distortions due to Gravitational Lensing

Andre Menck

December 13, 2012

1 Problem Statement

In addition to observing astronomical ob jects through the electromagnetic radiation they give oﬀ,
astronomers also study the universe by analyzing gravitational eﬀects on mater. More speciﬁcally,
one can work back from these observed eﬀects to determine the mass distribution in the universe
(both inside and outside galaxies). In this pro ject, we worked on one speciﬁc gravitational eﬀect:
weak gravitational lensing–that is, the bending of light due to medium-sized clusters of galaxies.
In particular, we attempted to measure the mass of unseen matter (also called dark matter) that
should be present to produce the observed lensing eﬀects. We analyzed data from the Dark Energy
galaxy Survey (DES) simulations, found out where weak lensing occurs, and attempted to ﬁt
our model of mass distribution to the data in the simulations. While this problem has been
attempted before (with varying degrees of success), the current techniques usually rely on the
shape distortion of galaxies caused by weak lensing. In this pro ject, we focused on the magnitude
distortions, which should provide a roughly independent measure of lens mass. However, the
intrinsic systematic uncertainty associated with this method is larger than in methods using shape
distortion calculations, due to the higher amount of noise in the galaxy magnitude distribution.

2 Available Data
Given a cluster of galaxies (and an associated dark matter halo)1 , we possess list of galaxies {u(i) :
i = 1, ..., N } near it2 . Each galaxy data point consists of a list of parameters u(i) = (m(i) , r(i) , z (i) ),
deﬁned as follows:

(1) m(i) is a vector of magnitudes in the G, R, I, Z, and Y bands (that is, each element of m(i) is
the ”brightness” of the galaxy, averaged over a range in wavelengths).

(2) r(i) is the distance (on the 2-dimensional sky plane) between the galaxy and the cluster center,
given in arcminutes.

(3) z (i) is the redshift of the galaxy3

1Physically, what we observe is that clusters of galaxies and halos of dark matter go hand-in-hand, so that dark
matter in the halos is what causes the gravitational lensing.
2Strictly speaking, these are the galaxies with a distance r < Rmax from the cluster center, where r is the distance
on the sky-plane, measured in arcminutes. Note that, in the three-dimensional picture, this includes galaxies that
are ”behind” the cluster–these are precisely the galaxies that will be aﬀected by weak lensing.
3For the purpose of this pro ject, we can think of redshift as the distance between the Earth and the given galaxy

1

3 Model and Relevant Physics

From the list of galaxies above, we wish to derive some prediction that can be parameterized by
ρ((cid:126)r), the density of dark matter. To do so, we introduce the galaxy number density function φ.
If there were no gravitational lensing, φ would have some natural functional form in magnitude
m–let us call this function φ0 . Through some fairly involved calculations, it can be shown that, in
the presence of a gravitational lens of (small) lensing parameter κ, the observed number density
function is [1]:

φ(r, m, z ; ρ) =

φ0 (m + 2κ, z )

1
1 + 2κ

Where the lensing parameter κ = κ(r, z ; ρ) is a complicated function of r and z that can be cal-
culated from the mass distribution ρ [2]. At this point, we will make a simplifying (but physical)
assumption, that the mass distribution follows a Navarro, Frenk and White (NFW) mass distribu-
(cid:17)2
(cid:16)
tion [3]:
δc (c)ρc (z )
This enables us to write down the dark matter distribution as a function parameterized by RS ,
the virial radius. The total halo mass is then obtained by integrating the given mass distribution.
This simpliﬁes our problem to ﬁtting this parameter to the available data. Note that, in order to
recover any predictive power whatsoever, this assumption is necessary– after all, if we were ﬁtting
a general mass distribution, our parameter space would be inﬁnite-dimensional.

ρ(r; RS , c) =

r
RS

1 + r
RS

4 Probabilistic Setup

The ﬁrst problem we face is to ﬁnd the functional form of φ0 . For this, we take the galaxies at
a radius r > Router away from the center of the cluster, and consider them to be unlensed4 . In
the relevant range of magnitudes, we have found that a shifted power law provides a good ﬁt to
the number density of galaxies, as a function of m. More speciﬁcally, given a redshift range z , we
model the probability of ﬁnding an unlensed galaxy of magnitude m as: pz (m) = β (m− a)α for m ∈
(a, mmax )5 . Using this, we can write down the maximum likelihood estimate for the value of the
parameters α and a:
(cid:80)N
1
log(mmax − a) − 1
i=1 log(m(i) )
N
Where β acts as a normalization constant. Since φ0 is just the galaxy number density, we can relate
these quantities as:

− 1 and ˆa = min
(m(i) )
i

ˆα =

πR2 (m − a)α = ˆβ (m − a)α
β
While this ﬁt was only an intermediate step in order to reach our ﬁnal goal, we will present a
sample of the results. In the graphs to below, the ﬁt φ0 (m) obtained is plotted alongside a few
values calculated from the data6 , for each magnitude band and range of galaxy redshift:

φ0 (m) = N

4This can be justiﬁed by noting that the value of κ at these radii is negligible, given halos of typical Rs
5We denote pz to make explicit that, for each redshift range, there is a diﬀerent density function. To achieve this,
the galaxies must be divided up into redshift bins.
6Note that these calculated data points are never used in the ﬁt (that is, our ﬁt only used individual galaxy
magnitudes). In a loose sense, these points are the ”histogram” of the galaxy magnitudes.

2

p(r, m) =

=

E [# of galaxies with magnitude = m and radius = r]
E [total # of galaxies]

Once this ﬁt is performed, we can move on to analyze the data of lensed galaxies (r(i) < Router ).
Given a lensed galaxy at a radius r and magnitude m, we want to ﬁnd the probability p(r, m) of
observing this data point:
(cid:82) mmax
(cid:82) Rmax
φ(r, m, z ; RS , c)
φ(r, m, z ; RS , c)drdm
0
0
The probability above enables us to (numerically) write down a log likelihood function for our
observed data points l(Rs ). While this function can be expressed and diﬀerentiated analytically
with respect to Rs , the resulting expression in unimaginably complex (due to dependence of κ on
Rs ). Therefore, in this pro ject it was decided to instead compute the likelihood function numerically,
as in the expression above. Thus, to maximize l with respect to Rs , we applied gradient ascent
numerically (that is, the derivative is computed numerically), which results in a relatively eﬃcient
optimization process.

5 Results

After setting the ﬁtting parameters7 , our initial attempt to implement the methods described
above produced the results shown in the graph below. As can be seen, the weak lensing signal is
quite weak for the less massive halos–the only conclusive result is for halos of mass larger than

7 Interestingly, we found that the ﬁt was relatively robust to changes in the maximum ﬁtting radius (within reason,
of course). However, the essential parameter to which the ﬁtting is extremely sensitive to is the number of bins in
galaxy redshift, set to 24.

3

5 × 1015 solar masses.
In studies of
weak lensing, this is usually the best
one can hope for [4], seeing as how
the signal present in the galaxy mag-
nitude data is often overwhelmed by
noise. Speciﬁcally, the error of ∼ 30%
on more massive halos is competi-
tive with those seen in galaxy shear
(shape) distortion studies [4]. To
readers who are unfamiliar with weak
lensing studies, this might seem like
a rather unsatisfying result–after all,
why shouldn’t we be able to recover the mass of a dark matter halo? To answer this question, we
bring up two important factors that impact our analysis:

(1) The non-uniformity in the galaxy background φ0 . In our model of this situation, we assumed
that galaxies are roughly uniformly distributed in the sky–however, this is far from true.

(2) As depicted graphically below, the two shifts in the function (scaling and shift to the left) have
an almost null combined eﬀect, so that it is increasingly diﬃcult to diﬀerentiate between lensed
and unlensed magnitude distributions (for small values of κ).

6 Future Studies - The Color-Magnitude Map

In the interest of producing a better ﬁt for the halo
masses, this pro ject will explore a possible remedy for the
second of the two factors above, which might be applied
to future studies. Speciﬁcally, if we were able to classify
the galaxies by their color, then we could perform the
analysis described above separately in each color group.
The advantage that we wish to explore is that diﬀerent
colored galaxies, when grouped together, might produce a
diﬀerent galaxy background function φ0 . If this is indeed
the case, then one should be able to analyze the combined shift in each magnitude function, pro-
ducing a stronger mass estimate (in other words, random noise is less likely to aﬀect each function
individually in such a way that mimicks lensing).
For this classiﬁcation problem, we take galaxy color and magnitude as our input features, where
color is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between two observable wavelength bands. Then, we proceed to
apply k-means clustering to classify the data.8 One important factor that we ran into while apply-
ing this algorithm is the range of the data in each coordinate–while magnitude varies between 14
and 24, the color is usually between 0.5 and -1.5. Thus, in order for the algorithm to weigh each
coordinate equally, we used the following kernel:
xT y (cid:55)→ x1y1
w
Where the weight w was computed by equating the squared spread of each coordinate: w = 102
22 =
25. This method produced reasonable results (similar to those found in the literature when a

+ x2y2

8 In the literature, it is customary to apply Gaussian Discriminant Analysis to this problem–we choose to use
k-means clustering because no training set was available for this given simulation.

4

training set is available [5]), depicted bellow. Also depicted are the ﬁtted and numerical galaxy
background functions for the I-band (averaged over all redshift)–there is an apparent diﬀerence in
the two, reﬂected in the parameter estimates.

One would expect, due to this diﬀerence, that this classiﬁcation will enable us to achieve better
errors on our halo mass estimation problem. However, there is an additional problem that comes
with separating the data as we have: namely, after binning the galaxies in redshift, each bin is left
with very few galaxies, which then compromises the galaxy background function ﬁt. The number
of observed galaxies in our data set proved much too small to make this method work adequately,
producing extremely poor ﬁts for the galaxy background function in each bin of redshift (and thus,
an extremely poor ﬁt for the halo masses). More speciﬁcally, over 70% of redshift bins have less
than 20 galaxies, making the power-law background ﬁt unviable. This secondary result, however,
is relevant to inform the direction that future studies of weak lensing might take. Given that the
number of background galaxies is increased (say, by improvements in data-gathering techniques),
one should expect a signiﬁcant improvement in the halo mass calibration. In other words, a future
experiment that used this technique in the data analysis would expect a reduction in the statistical
√
error (that is, such a study should check if the statistical error in the mass estimation does indeed
decrease faster than O(1/
N ) due to this technique).

7 References

[1] Bartelmann, Matthias, and Peter Schneider. ”Weak Gravitational Lensing.”
[2] Candace, and Tereasa Brainerd. ”Gravitational Lensing by NFW Halos.”
[3] Navarro, Julio F., Carlos S. Frenk, and Simon D. M. White. ”The Structure of Cold Dark
Matter Halos.” The Astrophysical Journal 462 (1996): 563
[4] Burke, David. et. all ”Weighing the Giants III: Methods and Measurements of Accurate Galaxy
Cluster Weak-Lensing Masses.””
[5] Wyder, Ted K., et. all ”The UV-Optical Galaxy Color-Magnitude Diagram. I. Basic Proper-
ties.” The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 173.2 (2007): 293-314”
A special thanks to David Burke, for his guidance and assistance in the entirety of this pro ject.

5

