CS229 Pro ject Report: Recommending movies and TV shows
based on Facebook prole data

Benjamin Paterson (paterben@stanford.edu)
Weifeng Zhang (wfzhang@stanford.edu)
Tim Mwangi (tmwangi@stanford.edu)

December 13, 2012

Abstract

The aim of this pro ject is to learn how to make pre-
dictions on what genre of movie a user is likely to be
interested in based on their raw Facebook data. We
collaborated with other groups to collect a dataset
of 10k unique users which was then parsed, stemmed
and tokenized. We trained two predictors each us-
ing a dierent model, SVM and Naive Bayes. In or-
der to correct for the skew in the training sets, we
generated an independent unskewed dataset that was
a subset of the original data, and compared perfor-
mance of the classiers using several metrics (accu-
racy, MCC, AUC). We then attempted several im-
provements, rst to the Naive Bayes model itself by
using TF/IDF weighting and document vector length
normalization, second to the features themselves by
ltering tokens using Mutual Information. The com-
bination of TF weighting and feature selection yields
signicantly better performance in terms of MCC and
AUC.

Introduction

The Facebook graph API was used to scrape friend
Facebook prole data. This results in a dataset of
Facebook user proles in XML format, listing for each
user the gender, locale, 'about', liked athletes, teams,
books, TV shows, movies, music, activities, interests
and sports sections of their Facebook prole. The
'liked' TV show and movies sections act as the labels
for our training and test data and the rest of the
sections are used as the attributes.
With several groups working on this pro ject around
10k users worth of Facebook prole data was col-
lected. A table associates 347 movies (title and de-
scription drawn from IMDB and Wikipedia) with
their associated movie genres (88 unique genres).
User Facebook movie and TV show 'likes' are then

compared with the table to generate labels for each
user prole. These labels are represented in y ∈
{0, 1}88 as each user can like or not like each genre.

Raw Data Processing

The elds of raw data (interests, about, etc.)
for
each user are concatenated into a single string and
then stemmed using the Python NLTK library. Punc-
tuation, stopwords, non-alphanumeric characters are
eliminated to produce a single list of about 32000
numbered tokens which acts as the vocabulary. Each
word in each prole is converted to the index of
the corresponding token and the resulting matrix is
stored in a le. The labels for each user are com-
puted by comparing the table mapping movie titles
to genres with the movie 'likes' of each user through
simple string matching, and are then stored in a sep-
arate le. Users with empty proles or with 0 'liked'
categories are eliminated, shrinking the dataset from
10k to about 3.6k users.
As a result, the features are a vector of about 32000
tokens, x ∈ R32000 and xi ∈ R where xi is the fre-
quency of that token in the user prole. Each line in
the feature le corresponds to a user prole and lists
the indexes of the prole's tokens in the vocabulary.
Each line in the labels le corresponds to the cate-
gories assigned to the user based on the movies and
TV show information present in the user's prole.
The most popular categories in order are: comedy
(8671 likes), goofy (6645 likes), satire (4454 likes),
drama (4352 likes) and debauchery(3419 likes).
We decided to take a multi-label classication ap-
proach to this problem, that is we treat placing a user
into a category as a binary problem, and treat all cat-
egories independently. For each category c, y ∈ {0, 1}
and y = 0 if the user does like any movie in that cat-
egory and y = 1 if the user likes at least one movie
in that category.

1

Methods Attempted

We trained a Naive Bayes classier and an SVM.

Naive Bayes

Basic Naive Bayes Classier

Our rst approach was to train a Naive Bayes classi-
er using the multinomial event model with Laplace
smoothing. Since we are doing multi-label classica-
tion, we trained one binomial classier per category,
ie. classier i tries to predict whether a queried user
prole will have liked category i.
In order to test
the classiers we split the user proles randomly into
training set (70%) and testing set (30%). Some re-
sults for these classiers are shown in g. 3-5. Preci-
sion, recall and error are all globally increasing func-
tions of the number of users interested in the classi-
er's category (number of labels y = 1) as long as
the average number of users interested is less than
50%. After this point, error goes down and precision
and recall continue to increase. This suggests that
the classier is strongly aected by the prior distri-
butions of the labels. We come back to this later. In
order to get a performance metric that is not biased
towards one type of label (high precision and recall
are not good indicators of performance when the data
has a lot of positive examples), we use the MCC:
√
T P ×T N −F P ×F N
M C C =
(T P +F P )(T P +F N )(T N +F P )(T N +F N )
MCC values are between -1 and 1, with 1 indicat-
ing perfect classication and -1 complete misclassi-
cation. Naive Bayes achieves a low average MCC of
0.029 (see Fig. 3).
The MCC values seem to have the same monotonic-
ity as the error rate when plotted against the priors,
with a maximum around p(y = 1) = 0.50. The val-
ues are overall very low. In order to know whether
the problem came from the feature space, we tried
using a smaller vocabulary of 5000 tokens using the
movie description data. This new feature space did
not improve performance.

Unskewed Naive Bayes

Since the prior distribution of the labels seemed to
have a strong eect on the classier, we trained a
second Naive Bayes classier using unskewed train-
ing data. This data was selected randomly and in-
dependently for each category so that the training
set had an exact 50/50 distribution of positive and
negative examples. We compared the two versions of
Naive Bayes using several metrics, averaged across all
88 categories: MCC, the area under the ROC curve

(AUC), error rate, precision and recall. The results
are detailed in Table 1.
On average, Unskewed Naive Bayes makes more
positive predictions as the bias in the training set,
which is negative for most categories, is no longer
present. As expected, recall is much increased at the
cost of the error rate. Perhaps more importantly,
MCC and AUC are both higher in the unskewed ver-
sion.

Naive Bayes improvements

[2] suggests using a "transformed" version of Naive
Bayes using the three following operations:

1. Transform the raw word frequency dij of word i
in document j by dij := log(1 + dij ) (TF trans-
formation)
(cid:80)
j 1(cid:80)
2. Normalize word frequencies by their inverse doc-
where δij = 1 if
ument frequency IDFi =
j δij
word i appears in document j (IDF transforma-
tion)

dij√(cid:80)
3. Normalize word frequency vectors to length 1 for
each document: dij :=
k (dk j )2 (L normaliza-

tion)

The paper also suggests improvements to alleviate the
eects of skewed training data, in particular using the
complement class, but they have no eect in the case
of binomial classication.
We implemented all possible combinations of the
above three transformations, on both basic and
unskewed Naive Bayes. On the basic version, we
found that length normalization when paired with the
TF and IDF transformations often gives uniformly
negative predictions, but each transformation works
acceptably on its own. None of the transformations
yielded a signicant improvement on the unskewed
dataset Naive Bayes. However, applying the TF and
IDF transformations on the basic dataset yielded sig-
nicantly better results in terms of MCC, AUC and
recall at the cost of accuracy.

Feature Selection

Description

We attempted feature selection using an adaptation
of the Mutual Information technique discussed in
class. Given the 88 categories and about 32000 to-
kens (features), for each category we computed the
mutual information of that category per token using
the formula supplied in the class lecture notes:

2

(cid:88)
xi∈{0,1}

(cid:88)
y∈{0,1}

M I (xi , y) =

p(xi , y) log

p(xi , y)
p(xi )p(y)

The probabilities p(xi , y), p(xi ) and p(y) were com-
puted from the empirical distributions and we used
Laplace smoothing to avoid dividing by 0 where ap-
plicable. We got an 88 by 32000 matrix and then we
computed the columnwise average to obtain the aver-
age mutual information and used it to select features
that have above a certain mutual information score
since the features with a score equal to or higher than
this score are the most highly correlated with the cat-
egories. We used a threshold MI score of 10−5 to re-
duce the number of tokens from 32000 to just 1019.
The features removed are those tokens that are very
infrequent throughout the training set. For exam-
ple tokens that appear only once in a single train-
ing example will have very low correlation with the
categories. On the other hand, tokens that are very
frequent like NUMBER have a very high correlation
with the categories and hence have high Mutual Infor-
mation. Thus it makes sense to discard those tokens
that do not have a high correlation with the cate-
gories.

Application to Naive Bayes

Applying Naive Bayes with this new document space
was simply a matter of applying the MI lter af-
ter the tokenization step and running the resulting
dataset through the Naive Bayes pipeline. Again,
two datasets were generated, one skewed and one
unskewed, and all the combinations of TF weighting,
IDF weighting and length normalization were tested
on the two datasets.

Below is a plot that shows the MCC dierence on
a per-category basis between the basic versions of
Naive Bayes (no transformation, skewed data) on the
raw dataset and on the MI-ltered dataset. The plot
shows that in most of the movie categories, there was
an improvement in the MCC after performing feature
selection. Furthermore, since there are less features
involved in training and testing Naive Bayes, running
the algorithm takes much less time and space.

3

Fig. 1: MCC comparison for basic Naive Bayes
with no lter feature selection applied and with lter
feature selection applied.
With feature selection, the performance of basic
Naive Bayes in terms of average MCC jumped from
0.029 to 0.093, and in terms of average AUC from
0.442 to 0.545, with only a small loss in terms of accu-
racy. However, the best results were obtained using
TF weighting, with the TF/IDF combination close
behind. These results are shown in Table 1. Feature
selection did not seem to have a positive eect on the
unskewed version of Naive Bayes.
In terms of AUC, the unskewed, non MI-ltered
classiers remain the best performers. However, we
believe MCC is a better metric than AUC for the
same reasons we preferred MCC over precision and
recall.

SVM

We trained an SVM in parallel with Naive Bayes.

Scaling

We used scaled data to avoid tokens with greater nu-
meric ranges dominating those with smaller numeric
ranges, since kernel values depend on the inner prod-
ucts of feature vectors. It is also helpful to simplify
calculation by scaling. We scaled data to [0,1] for
both test and training data.

Kernel selection

Commonly used kernels are the linear kernel,
K (xi , xj ) = xT
i xj and the radial basis function (RBF)

Metric
MCC
AUC
Error rate
Precision
Recall

Basic TF/IDF
0.050
0.029
0.513
0.442
0.238
0.123
0.161
0.164
0.336
0.141

L
0.052
0.400
0.101
0.597
0.081

Unskewed MI MI + TF/IDF MI + TF SVM linear
0.009
0.112
0.100
0.093
0.051
-
0.564
0.561
0.545
0.676
0.166
0.126
0.177
0.148
0.618
0.107
0.206
0.196
0.242
0.146
0.167
0.224
0.329
0.260
0.879

SVM RBF
0.083
-
0.100
0.450
0.087

Table 1: Comparison of dierent versions of Naive Bayes (rst 7 columns) and SVM (last 2 columns).

K (xi , xj ) = exp(−γ ||xi − xj ||2 ), γ > 0. We used both
to nd the boundary for each category.

Cross Validation for parameter

To nd the penalty parameter(C) and gamma for
the model, we used the Grid-search method with 5-
fold cross-validation. Grid-search is time-consuming.
However, it is good for parallel computing, since each
pair C and gamma are independent.

against it (see Fig. 4). The best score happens at
training set size = 30
test set size
70 =
ratio 0.42, which is similar to
0.4285.. This indicates that SVM's performance is
better when training data is less skewed, similar to
Naive Bayes.

Comparison between Naive Bayes and
SVM

For both Naive Bayes and SVM, MCC is large in cate-
gories with many likes, while error is small in strongly
skewed categories. RBFSVM's MCC is compara-
ble to the best performance by Naïve Bayes, though
slightly lower.

The SVM approach seems to yield the best accu-
racy (90.00%). Some of the Naive Bayes approaches
(length normalization only, for example) yielded sim-
ilar accuracy but at the cost of increased MCC. Naive
Bayes with MI ltering and TF transformation still
performed best in terms of MCC while maintaining
an acceptable error rate and AUC.

Fig. 2: Grid search for parameter in SVM with
5-fold cross-validation.
The result above shows that for category 1, C=512
and γ = 3.05 · 10−5 is preferred for the RBF model.
For the linear kernel, we used the L2-regularized L2-
loss linear support vector classication model .

Results

RBF has better performance than Linear kernel ex-
cept in recall rate from Table 1. RBF nonlinearly
maps the features to an innite dimensional space,
so it has more exibility than the linear kernel hy-
perplane. Furthermore, linear kernel is a special case
of RBF [3]. We calculated the ratio of likes in test
set and likes in training set and plotted the MCC

Conclusion

The nal performance of our classiers is much bet-
ter than the basic Naive Bayes and linear kernel SVM
that we rst implemented. However, an MCC score
of 0.112 is still very low compared to the best theo-
retical performance of 1. The sparsity of the tokens
in the user proles and the uniformly negative pre-
dictions of our classiers on some categories suggest
that more data per user prole may yield signicant
improvements, for example by incorporating status
updates in the user prole data. However, we be-
lieve that the biggest culprit is the way the data is
labeled: there is no guarantee that a user that does
enjoy a particular category of movie has actually liked
a movie from that category on Facebook.

4

Fig. 5: Error rate as a function of the average
number of likes per user for a category for both Naive
Bayes and SVM.

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the ScreamingVelocity
founders, Wayne Yurtin and Graham Darcey who
came up with this pro ject and provided the initial
data scraping scripts, as well as Andrew Maas and
the rest of the CS229 course sta for their guidance
while we were working on the pro ject. We are also
grateful to every one of the students in CS229 who
provided their own Facebook data.

References

[1] Fan Rong-En, Chang Kai-Wei, Hsieh Cho-Jui,
Wang Xiang-Rui, Lin Chih-Jen. LIBLINEAR: A
Library for Large Linear Classication. Journal of
Machine Learning Research 9 (2008) 1871-1874.
Submitted 5/08, Published 8/08.

[2] Jason D. M. Rennie, Lawrence Shih, Jaime Tee-
van, David R. Karger. Tackling the Poor Assump-
tions of Naive Bayes Text Classiers, In Proceed-
ings of the Twentieth International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2003, pages 616623.

[3] Keerthi, S. S., C.-J. Lin. Asymptotic behaviors
of support vector machines with Gaussian kernel.
Neural Comput. 15 (7), 2003, pages 16671689.

Fig. 3: A plot of the MCC of basic Naive Bayes
and Naive Bayes with MI + TF for each category.
The latter has consistently higher MCC.

Fig. 4: A plot of MCC against the number of likes
in the test set divided by the number of likes in the
training set. Both SVM and Naive Bayes do best
when the training and test set have similar label dis-
tributions. This was one of the motivations for cre-
ating an unskewed dataset.

5

