Classifying Substance Abuse among Young Teens

Dylan Rhodes, Sunet: dylanr

December 14, 2012

Abstract

This pro ject attempts to use machine learning to classify substance abuse among young
teens. It makes use of a dataset published by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Data
Archive for open use and analysis. The dataset comprises a nationally representative sample of
9227 American schoolchildren with the results of a questionnaire posing topics such as home life,
eating habits, family structure, hobbies, personality/attitude, school life, bullying, and physical
activity as well as the use of alcohol, tobacco, marijuana, and other controlled substances. Over
the course of the pro ject so far, three machine learning algorithms were trained, tested, and
compared:
logistic regression, unweighted linear regression, and a kernelized support vector
machine. As a baseline, the naive classier, which always predicts -1 (no substance abuse), was
compared to the three algorithms. Ultimately, the kernelized support vector machine displayed
slightly higher classication accuracy with properly tuned parameters, but logistic regression
oered similar results with a lower time complexity.

1

Introduction

As previously stated, the goal of this pro ject was to use lifestyle factors to predict substance abuse
among young teens. This is an important task for several, fairly obvious reasons. First, early
substance use, besides being ob jectively undesirable in and of itself, has been shown to indicate
problems later in life including delinquent behavior and later abuse.[1, 4] Second, another ob jective
of the pro ject was to identify the factors most strongly correlated with substance use (both nega-
tively and positively), which could be used to develop more eective programs aimed at discouraging
substance use.
There has been a fair amount of research on this problem spanning several decades, including
several statistical and machine learning based studies.
In general, they have conrmed that a
number of personality characteristics and environmental inuences are predictive of early initiation
to alcohol and other substances and high intensity of use. In particular, several have concluded
that individual attitude characteristics and quality of parental relationships are some of the most
highly indicative factors for early onset substance use. [1, 2] Over the course of this pro ject, factor
analysis was used to examine and verify these claims.
Several challenges are immediately apparent when considering this problem, however. First, the
dataset is fairly skewed towards non-use, especially for 'harder' drugs. To overcome this issue, it
was decided to restrict predictions to use of alcohol, tobacco, and marijuana, all of which had a
signicant population of users (~20%). Second, it is obvious that substance use does not stem from
a single, or even specic combination of several, factors. This makes use hard to predict, as it is
a fairly complex problem, with psychological and environmental components. However, judging by
the correlations exhibited by other studies, and the large number of features in the dataset - 264
per participant, as well as their large range of topics, I hoped to achieve some greater degree of
accuracy than a naive classier.

1

2 Approach

During the pro ject, three methods were tested and compared with the baseline method, naive
classication. All of the approaches were basic machine learning algorithms including logistic re-
gression, unweighted linear regression, and kernelized support vector machines. They were chosen
for inclusion for various reasons.
Unweighted linear regression is a simple algorithm with a closed form solution. It is a simple
maximum likelihood based estimator which can be run very quickly, with a time complexity of
O(mn2 ) and space complexity of O(mn) where m is the number of training examples and n is
the length of the feature vector. It was chosen to contrast with the other two algorithms in both
simplicity and low space and time complexity and expected to perform poorly as a result.
Logistic regression is also a maximum likelihood estimator with uses the sigmoid function as a
probability distribution. It has a time complexity of O(mnk) and a space complexity of O(mn)
where m and n are as dened above and k is the number of iterations. For this pro ject, k = 10,
which was chosen as both a reasonable choice for convergence and to put the runtime in between
linear regression and the support vector machine.
It was chosen as an algorithm of mid range
simplicity and complexity.
Finally, a kernelized support vector machine (SVM) was evaluated against the other two algo-
rithms. SVM's use hinge loss to maximize the margin between a high dimensional decision boundary
and the examples on both sides closest to it. SVM's can expand the feature vector into higher di-
mensions using kernels, which are a set of functions that compactly represent the dot product of
two transformed vectors ie. K ((cid:126)x, (cid:126)z ) = φ((cid:126)x) · φ((cid:126)z ) for some function φ. The space and time com-
plexity of the SVM depends on the kernel chosen, but in general, both are higher than the space
and time complexity of the other two algorithms. The SVM was chosen as the most complicated
and hopefully accurate algorithm.

3 Experiments

For the experiments, the three algorithms were all trained over a randomized sample of 80% of the
dataset and tested on the remaining 20%. A binary vector was extracted from the dataset with
-1 values indicating no use of the substance and +1 values indicating use for alcohol, tobacco, and
marijuana. Initially, the feature vector included the responses to all 264 questions on the survey
excluding those for direct use of the substances. Unfortunately, this produced a 100% successful
classication rate over the dataset, due to the inclusion of several, directly correlated features - for
example, use over the past month - which made the classier's job far too simple. Thus, feature
analysis was performed on the survey, and 45 questions which were directly related to substances
were removed from the dataset, leaving 219 features to use for classication. These features were
organized into the categories of demographics, computer usage, auence, living arrangements, phys-
ical activity, nutrition, body image, hygiene, physical and mental health, interpersonal relationships,
school activity, bullying, and parents' occupations.
After the feature vector had been trimmed, linear and logistic regression were run over the
dataset, producing the following results (to see the code, please read the attached les):
accuracy
false neg.
true neg.
false pos.
true pos.
Baseline Results:
80.484%
339
1378
0
0
Marijuana
Alcohol
0
0
1410
326
81.106%
76.997%
409
1369
0
0
Tobacco
accuracy
false neg.
true neg.
false pos.
true pos.
Linear Regression:
37.018%
4
308
1090
335
Marijuana
Alcohol
319
1084
326
7
37.154%
38.076%
7
275
1094
402
Tobacco

2

accuracy
false neg.
true neg.
false pos.
true pos.
Logistic Regression:
85.895%
171
1324
74
168
Marijuana
86.521%
156
1332
78
170
Alcohol
82.058%
218
1268
101
191
Tobacco
As you can see, the results of linear regression were fairly dismal, while logistic regression
managed to outscore the baseline in all cases by around 5.5%. Its runtime, however, was fairly
longer, as expected.
To further analyze the results of linear regression, it is clear that the classier was skewed towards
a positive prediction. Had I wanted to further optimize the performance of this algorithm, I could
have transformed the dataset into a more symmetric form and rerun the algorithm. However, the
linear regression algorithm was not really my focus, more a yardstick for the performance of the
other two, so I moved on.
Logistic regression produced a well trained classier. In the end, it turned out to have nearly
the accuracy of the SVM with tuned hyperparameters. Moreover, the algorithm had a signicantly
shorter runtime than the SVM with the chosen number of iterations. Had I wanted to optimize
its performance further, I could have increased the number of iterations and analyzed the training
dataset to remove outliers. The theta vector was also analyzed for the features with the highest
weights, corresponding to the features with the highest correlation for or against substance abuse.
This list broadly conrmed the ndings of other, similar studies in terms of most important risk
factors. The full analysis is in the conclusion.
Finally, the SVM was run against the training data. The LIBSVM library version 3.14 was used
to both train the model and test it over the test set. The data was output from Matlab into a
LIBSVM compatible format and the algorithm was run in the shell. Initially, no hyperparameters
or optimization techniques were used to provide a baseline for further optimization.

./svm-train trainingData model
./svm-predict testingData model output

Marijuana accuracy Alcohol accuracy Tobacco accuracy
Initial SVM Results:
80.484%
81.106%
76.997%
As you may notice, these results are identical to those of the naive classier, indicating that
the model always predicted -1. Obviously, this was an overtting of the skewed data, so it was
decided to scale the feature vector in order to reduce variance. Then, the test was run again, with
the following results:

./svm-scale -s scale_params trainingData > scaleTrainingData
./svm-scale -r scale_params testingData > scaleTestingData
./svm-train scaleTrainingData scaleModel
./svm-predict scaleTestingData scaleModel scaleOutput

Marijuana accuracy Alcohol accuracy Tobacco accuracy
Scaled Data SVM Results:
83.592%
84.447%
80.8221%
At this point, several options for optimization manifested themselves. First, there were several
kernels to train and test the dataset on. Second, from the output le it was clear that the model
was still skewed towards a -1 prediction, so another idea for optimization was to weight the +1
examples more heavily than the -1 using a weight hyperparameter. Finally, once kernels had been
selected, there were additional hyperparameters to optimize for each.
To examine the eect of dierent kernels, the SVM was run again with linear, polynomial (of
degree 3), sigmoid, and radial basis function kernels. In the interest of time, it was decided to select
the two highest performing kernels for further optimization, which turned out to be the linear and
radial basis function kernels.
Next, the hyperparameters of each kernel were tuned to optimize accuracy. The linear function
takes a cost parameter and the radial basis function kernel takes both a cost parameter and a

3

gamma value. Using an exponentially growing test for the linear cost and a an exponential grid
search to optimize radial basis function cost and gamma, the optimal values of each were ascertained.
Unfortunately, there is not room in my writeup to include all of these gures, but ultimately, the
optimal cost for the linear kernel stood at c = 20 while the optimal parameters for the radial basis
function were determined to be c = 25 , γ = 1/(27 ). These parameters turned out to be optimal for
all three datasets, strangely, but likely because they were fairly similar.
Finally, in recognition of the remaining skew towards a positive prediction, the weight values
were optimized for both kernels. Binary search over the -4 to +4 range weighing the +1 to the -1
values converged on the optimal weight value for each dataset, which did dier between the three
substances. Ultimately, the following optimal accuracies were produced, including each algorithm:
Marijuana accuracy Alcohol accuracy Tobacco accuracy
86.816%
86.233%
82.621%
Linear SVM
1.25
0.75
1.5
Optimal Weight
81.159%
85.369%
85.607%
Radial Basis Function SVM
0.75
0.75
0.5
Optimal Weight
85.895%
86.521%
82.058%
Logistic Regression
38.076%
37.154%
37.018%
Linear Regression
80.484%
81.106%
76.997%
Baseline
As you can see, the tuned linear kernel turned out to be the most eective algorithm overall,
although its performance was narrowly exceeded by the logistic regression algorithm when predicting
alcohol use. Interestingly, the optimal +1 weight parameter for the alcohol use dataset for the linear
kernel turned out to be less than 1, which was unexpected, due to the preponderance of -1 examples.

4 Conclusion

Overall, the results of the pro ject were somewhat disappointing, although somewhat informative.
The best algorithm did clearly exceed the baseline test, but not by an enormous margin. It is likely
that the complexity of the social problem examined (substance abuse) lends itself to a dicult
prediction, since it would seem more than possible for two teens with the same lifestyle habits
to make individual choices whether or not to abuse a substance. However, the relative success
of the algorithm over the baseline illustrates that lifestyle features are correlated with substance
abuse in teens in some way, which supports the existing literature.
In particular, to return to
the analysis of the results of the logistic regression, the highest common risk factors of the three
substances consisted of more friends using substances, older age, and separation of parents, while
the factors most correlated to lack of abuse consisted of asian heritage, white heritage, living with
one's grandmother, and interestingly, living in foster care. These results conrm those of previous
studies with the exception of the inuence of friends using substances, which previous studies have
claimed to be secondary to personal traits, but which in my analysis turned out to be by far the
most important risk factor for substance abuse.[3]

5 References

References

[1] Marsha E. Bates and Erich W. Labouvie. Adolescent risk factors and the prediction of per-
sistent alcohol and drug use into adulthood. Alcoholism: Clinical and Experimental Research,
21(5):944950, 1997.

4

[2] Patricia L. Dobkin and Richard E. Tremblay. Individual and peer characteristics in predicting
boys' early onset of substance abuse: A seven-year longitudinal study. Child Development,
66(4):1198  1214, 1995.

[3] J.D. Hawkins, R.F. Catalano, and J.Y. Miller. Risk and protective factors for alcohol and other
drug problems in adolescence and early adulthood: implications for substance abuse prevention.
Psychological bul letin, 112(1):64, 1992.

[4] Steve Sussman, Clyde W Dent, and Linda Leu. The one-year prospective prediction of substance
abuse and dependence among high-risk adolescents. Journal of Substance Abuse, 12(4):373 
386, 2000.

5

