Association of enhancers and genes they regulate 

Yunxiao Zhang 

Guided by Sofia Kyriazopoulou 

12/14/12 

Final write-up 

 

Overview 

Enhancers  are  DNA  elements  that  specifically  activate  the  expression  of  their  target 

genes.  They  are  usually  associated with modifications  on  the  histones,  the  proteins  that 

facilitate  the  organization  of  DNA  in  the  cells,  and  thus  can  be  identified  based  on  such 

modifications. 

Enhancers  have  features  quite  different  from  promoters,  including  high  variability  in 

nucleotide  sequence,  high  flexibility  in  relative  position  to  the  target  genes  and  highly 

complicated combinatorial regulation.  

The  enhancer  sequences  have  a  high  diversity  and  account  for  the  large  degree  of 

variability  in  gene  expression  between  different  cell  types.  The  sequences  can  be  far 

from  genes  and  quite  flexible  in  position.  It’s  far  from  trivial  to  associate  an  enhancer 

sequence to its target genes.  

On  the  other  hand,  the  large  numbers  of  enhancers  and  genes  create  a  large  set  of 

combinations,  and  hence  high  correlations  readily  occur  simply  by  chance,  creating  a 

host of false-positive results. 

The  project  aims  to  associate  enhancer  elements  to  targets,  based  on  the  activity  of 

enhancers  and  the  expression  level  of  genes.  The  activity  of  enhancers  is  variable  in 

different  cell  types  and  accounts  for  different  gene  expression  levels.  The  active 

enhancers are  first  recognized by epigenetic modifications. Then  the enhancers  in action 

are fed into a Generalized Linear Model (GLM) to predict the expression level of a host of 

genes.  Then  with  parameter  selection,  the  enhancers  most  relevant  to  the  gene 

expression level are identified and the association is established. 

Active enhancers are characterized by H3K27 acetylation peak whereas the transcription 

start  sites  (TSS)  have  enriched  H3K4  methylation  peaks  (Fig  1).  Some  H3K27 

acetylation  peaks  will  be  proximal  to  the  H3K4  methylation  and  highly  correlated  with 

gene expression  level. These proximal peaks  tend  to make other acetylation peaks trivial 

when  fit  into  the GLM model. Hence only  the  subset of H3K27 acetylation peaks without 

overlapping H3K4 methylation peaks are recognized as active enhancers in the project. 

Fig1. Epigenetic modifications of enhancers and transcription start site (TSS) 

 

 

Genome  is  divided  into  functional  partitions  by  insulator  elements,  so  that  long  range 

action  of  enhancers  is  limited.  Besides,  significant  association  would  be  offset  by 

background  noise  if  too  many  peaks  were  included  in  analysis.  Therefore,  active 

enhancers  are  subsequently  divided  into  subsets  based  on  functional  partition  of  the 

genome.  The  GLM  model  only  considers  the  enhancers  in  the  same  functiona l  partition 

as the gene and will be more sensitive to relevant enhancer elements. 

In  order  to  select  the  most  relevant  enhancer  elements,  the  GLM  model  is  fitted  via 

penalized  maximum  likelihood  with  L1-regularization.  Cross-validation  determines  the 

best  lambda  value  for  L1-regularization  and  selects  the  parameters.  The  model  is  then 

refit with the selected parameters. Peaks with coefficients that significantly deviate from 0 

are considered as the enhancer in action. 

In order  to  validate  the  results, False-Discovery Rate  (FDR)  is estimated. The genes are 

shuffled, so that the peaks are fitted to a random gene. The same criteria are used to pick 

significant  associations.  The  associations  found  this  way  were  considered  as  false-

discoveries. The FDR is estimated by the following formula 

     

                              
 
                         

The threshold for significance will then be tweaked to minimize FDR. 

Raw Data 

Chromatin-Immunoprecipitation  (ChIP)  and  RNA-Sequencing  (RNA-Seq)  Data  from 

lymphoblasts  in  13  individuals  were  generated  by  the  Snyder  Lab  at  Stanford  and 

preprocessed  by  Sofia  Kyriazopoulou  to  obtain  the  signal  at.  H3K4  methylation  and, 

H3K27  acetylation  peaks  as  well  as  the  expression  values  of  genes.  The  data  are  also 

processed  with  DESeq  to  find  differential  expression  patterns.  Only  genes  that  show 

differential  expression  in  at  least  10  pairs  of  the  samples  are  included  in  the  enhancer 

prediction. 

Preprocessing of raw data 

 

For  the  genes  with  very  low  expression,  fold-change  tends  to  be  overestimated  due  to 

experimental  noise.    To  reduce  the  effect  of  noise  on  low-signal  genes/peaks,  the  signal 

was  variance  stabilized  using  the  asinh  function.  The  signal  across  all  individuals  was 

quantile normalized to account for experimental differences between the cell lines. 

The  peak  data  are  also  similarly  processed,  to  get  the  mean  counts  from  replicate 

experiments and then performed asinh quantile normalization. 

Partition of Genome 

The  genome  is  partitioned  with  DESeq  data.  Genes  with  differential  expression  and  the 

flanking  regions  without  differential  expression  are  defined  as  a  functional  partition. 

Partitions with too short lengths are merged. 

Fig 2. Function partition of the genome 

 

 

The  real  functional  partition  in  genome  is  formed  by  insulator  elements  and  the  genes 

within  a  partition  will  tend  to  have  similar  trends  in  expression.  The  partitions  obtained 

from  DESeq  data  is  an  approximation  of  the  real  partitions.  The  length  of  partitions  are 

well-controlled  to  be  less  than  1Mb,  so  the  actual  partitions  obtained  this  way  are  non-

overlapping with gaps. The regions without significant differential expression are depleted 

of  partitions.  This  approach  for  partitioning  is  appropriate  for  finding  associations  in 

enhancers. 

The mean and median of the length of partitions based on DESeq p-value 1e-4, 1e-3, 1e-

2, 1e-1 is plotted as follows. 

Fig 3. Change of length as p-value 

 

 

The length of partitions decreases gradually with less stringent p-value.   

Chromosome 1 is shown below to shown the distributions of the partitions in the genome.. 

Less  stringent  p-value  yields  a  host  of  small  partitions.  The  final  p-value  is  chosen  to 

ensure  that  the  size  of  partitions  are  not  too  small  and  the  partitions  cover  all  the 

differentially expressed genes. 

Fig 4. Partitions in the genome 

 

 

L1-regularization 

The  GLM  is  fitted  with  L1  regularization.  In  this  way,  only  the  parameters  (H3K27 

acetylation  peaks  of  enhancers)  highly  relevant  to  gene  expression  have  non -zero 

coefficients.  Cross-validation  is  used  to  determine  the  lambda  value  with  the  least 

deviation.  Parameters  (the  peaks)  with  non-zero  coefficients  are  chosen  as  the 

candidates. The selected parameters are  then  refit  in GLM. The p -value  for coefficient  to 

be zero  is calculated. Only parameters with p-value  less  than a  threshold are considered 

significant and recorded as a hit. 

The number of hits and estimated FDR is as follows. 
Number of Hits 
Criteria 
p-value<0.01 
224 
69 
p-value<0.001 
p-value<0.01&  
77 
log-likelihood>20 
p-value<0.01& 
log-likelihood>30 
 

40 

FDR 
0.284 
0.282 
0.222 

0.115 

Discussion 

In  previous  studies1,2,  diverse  cell  types  were  used  to  include  a  major  change  in  the 
transcriptomes,  so  that  the  differential  expression  would  be  common  and  associations 

would  be  abundant.  In  these  studies, major  enhancers  for  determinants  of  the  cell  types 

would be discovered. 

In  this  project,  the  data  are  derived  from  lymphoblast  cell  lines  from  13  individuals.  As 

only  one  cell  type  is  used,  the  differential  expression  will  reflect  minor  differences 

between  individuals  and  tend  to  be  rare.  The  associations  of  enhancers  with  genes 

discovered  in  this  data  set  will  thus  be  rare  but  related  with  personal  genomics.  The 

nature  of  the  discovery  determines  that  most  of  the  previously  established  associations 

will not be present in the results. 

The  algorithm  for  this  project  discovered  a  very  tiny  set  of  the  enhancers. Many  of  them 

are not reported in previous studies. The FDR is still not satisfactory, but can be improved 

by finely-tuned cut-off parameters in the algorithm. 

 

1 

Thurman, R. E. et al. The accessible chromatin landscape of the human genome. Nature 

489, 75-82, doi:10.1038/nature11232 

nature11232 [pii] (2012). 

2  Ernst,  J.  et  al.  Mapping  and  analysis  of  chromatin  state  dynamics  in  nine  human  cell 

types. Nature 473, 43-49, doi:10.1038/nature09906 

nature09906 [pii] (2011). 

 

 

