“Electronic Devices Sales Prediction Using Social Media Sentiment Analysis” 

Sahar Nassirpour, Parnian Zargham, Reza Nasiri Mahalati 

 

 

Introduction:  

 

Nowadays,  social  media  has  become  a  platform  for  people  to  convey  their  voice  to  the  public. 

Among  various  opinions  that  people  share  and  exchange,  there  are  a  lot  of  comments  about 

consumer  products.  Recently,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  chatter  of  the  consumers  in  the  social 

media  such  as  Facebook,  Twitter,  MySpace,  Google+  and  etc.  correlates  strongly  with  the 

product’s  actual  financial  performance  in  the  market.  This  forms  a  beneficial  database  for 

companies to analyze the consumers’ demands in order to make a quantitative prediction of their 

potential customers.   We were  inspired by  this new potential and decided  to exploit our machine 

learning  skills  in  order  to  investigate  the  trends  in  the  social media  discussions  and  use  them  to 

predict the actual sales of electronic devices before their release.  

 

We  chose  the  electronic  device  market,  because  first  of  all,  the  electronic  device  market  has 

always  been  very  competitive,  and  recently  with  the  growing  variety  of  new  products  it  is  very 

challenging  to  predict which brand will dominate  the market. Having  an  estimate of  the product 

sale  before  the  release  of  the  product  would  provide  the  company  with  prior  knowledge  of  its 

profit  and  also  help  them  decide  the  quantity  of  the  release  in  different  regions  based  on  the 

request.  Secondly,  the  actual  outcome  of  the  electronic  device  market  sales  can  be  easily 

accessed and we can use it to train our model. 

 

In  this  project,  we  try  to  predict  the  sales  of  electronic  devices  based  on  the  sentiment  of  the 

comments  made  about  them  on  Twitter  before  their  release.  To  predict  the  sentiment  of  the 

comments  we  use  a  machine  learning  framework  based  on  recursive  autoencoders  (RAE)  for 

sentence-level  prediction  of  sentiment  label  distributions.  This  method  learns  vector  space 

representations  for  multi-word  phrases.  In  sentiment  prediction  tasks  these  representations 

outperform other state-of-the-art approaches on commonly used datasets, such as movie reviews, 

without  using  any  pre-defined  sentiment  lexica  or  polarity  shifting  rules.  After  sentiment 

prediction,  we  use  linear  regression  with  four  features  to  predict  the  sales  of  the  devices.  We 

have  selected  total  number  of  comments,  number  of  positive  comments,  total  number  of 

retweeted  comments  and  number  of  retweeted  positive  comments  as  the  four  features  of  our 

model.  We  compare  our  prediction  accuracy  with  a  linear  regression  only  based  on  the  total 

number  of  comments  with  no  sentiment  analysis  and  show  that  our  method  significantly 

improves the prediction accuracy. 

In  the  following  sections, we  first describe what kind of data we plan  to use  for our purpose and 

how  we  have  collected  them.  Next,  we  will  talk  about  the  techniques  that  have  been  used  to 

achieve the goal of predicting the sales. And finally, we talk about the results of our projects and 

come to a conclusion. 

 

Data:  

 

For this project, we need two sets of data: first the social media content that will be used to form 

the  input  features  to  our  system,  and  second  the  sales  revenue  numbers  of  different  electronic 

device  products  that will  be  used  as  the  target  variables.   Together  these  two  datasets  will  form 

our training set. 

 

 

  Social  Media  content:  For  the  purposes  of  this  project,  we  decided  to  use  Twitter  data. 

We have collected Twitter data through the http://stanford.discovertext.com/ website. The 

way  the  website  works,  is  that  you  can  provide  it  with  a  specific  keyword  and  it 

automatically  fetches  all  the  tweets  that  contain  that  keyword.  It  also  allows  for  time 

windowing  which  is  very  helpful  for  our  project  and  enables  us  to  focus  only  on  the 

comments  that are posted  in  the pre-release  time window of  a  specific product. Next, we 

need  to  modify  the  data  to  have  a  consistent  format.  In  particular  we  need  to  parse  the 

data and convert it to a readable format for our algorithm. 

 

 The  format  that  was  needed  for  our  project  dictated  us  to  map  the  comments  into  a 

vector  space.  Basically,  we  stored  each  comment  in  a  binarized  vector,  each  component 

being  the  number  of  that  word  in  the  comment  in  a  predefined  body  of  words.  A 

MATLAB  function  was  written  that  reads  all  the  comments  and  uses  MATLAB’s 

wordMap functions to find that word in our pre-stored body of words and store the vector 

representation of all the comments. 

  Product Sales data: We picked 9 electronic devices  that have been  recently  released and 

collected the actual sales numbers from the internet [4].  

 

 

The  following  table  summarizes  all  the  collected  data. And  the  following  figure  shows  the  data 

in a plot. 

 

 

Product Make and Model 

First Quarter 

Sales in units  

Number of Twitter 

after Release 

(figures in thousands) 

Comments 

Apple iPhone4 

3rd quarter 2010 

Apple iPhone4S 

4th quarter 2011 

Apple iPad2 

2nd quarter 2011 

Apple iPad3 

2nd quarter 2012 

Samsung Droid Charge 

3rd quarter 2010 

Samsung Galaxy S 

1st quarter 2011 

Samsung Galaxy SII 

3rd quarter 2011 

Samsung Galaxy SIII 

3rd  quarter 2012 

Samsung Nexus 

2nd quarter 2011 

4912 

15073 

4293 

5713 

300 

354 

574 

3000 

401 

3777 

6155 

2106 

2189 

1629 

371 

882 

3122 

551 

 

 

 

 
s
t
i
n
u
 
n
i
 
s
e
l
a
S
 
.
S
.
U

 
)
0
0
0
1
x
(

Number of Comments 

 

010002000300040005000600070000200040006000800010000120001400016000 

Methods:  

For  this project, we decided  to use  the “Semi-Supervised Recursive Autoencoders  for Predicting 

Sentiment Distributions”  [1] method. The  reason being  that  the mentioned algorithm has  several 

desirable  properties.  First  of  all,  it  takes  the  whole  sentence  including  the  syntax  and  grammar 

into  account  instead of  just  focusing on  the bag-of-words. This  is  done  through paying  attention 

to  the  order  of  words  in  the  statement,  which  gives  us  a  more  accurate  evaluation  of  the 

sentiment behind  the statement. Second,  it does not require any predefined dictionary of positive 

or negative words. 

 

After  performing  the  sentiment  analysis,  we  extract  four  features  from  all  the  gathered  Twitter 

data  for  each product  and  try  to  fit  a model  to  our data  that best  predicts  the  sales  figures of  the 

electronic devices. 

The following sections describe each of these steps: 

 

Sentiment analysis 

As  described  above,  after  gathering  the  data,  we  first  used  the  “semi-supervised  recursive 

autoencoders for predicting sentiment distributions” method developed by Socher et al to classify 

the  comments  about  each  product  into  positive  and  negative  categories.  For  training  purposes, 

we  manually  classified  2000  tweets  about  iPhone5  into  positive  and  negative  groups  and  used 

them  as  training  data  in  our  classifier  (iPhone5  was  chosen  because  it  had  the  most  number  of 

comments both positive and negative and so was ideal for making ground truth). 

 

Using  70/30  cross-validation  on  this  data,  we  found  out  the  comment  classification  accuracy  to 

be 83%. We then used the trained classifier to categorize the comments about other products into 

positive and negative groups. 

 

Sales prediction 

After sentiment analysis, we used a linear regression model with four features to predict the sales 

of the products in table 1. We used the following four features suggested by Asur and Huberman 

[2]  in  our  model:  total  number  of  comments,  number  of  positive  comments,  total  number  of 

retweeted comments and number of positive retweeted comments.  

 

We  used  the  sales  data  for  iPad2,  iPhone4,  Samsung  Droid  Charge,  Samsung  Galaxy  Nexus, 

Samsung Galaxy S, Samsung Galaxy SII and Samsung Galaxy SIII  to train our model and cross -

validated it on iPad3 and iPhone4s sales. 

 

 

Experiments and Results: 

 

We  tested our sales prediction accuracy against a  linear regression model  that only uses  the total 

number of tweets about a product with no sentiment analysis and added features. The table below 

shows the results. It is seen that our method significantly improves the prediction accuracy. 

 

 

 

Conclusion: 

In  this  project, we  showed  how  the  content  of  social media  produced  by  the mass  public  can  be 

used  to  predict  how well  a  product  is  going  to  do  in  the market  before  its  release.  In  particular, 

using  the Twitter data about certain  electronic devices, we constructed a model  that can  forecas t 

the  actual  sales  figures  of  a  product with  a  reasonable  accuracy. We  also  performed  an  state-of-

the-art sentiment analysis on  the comments  to determine  the polarity of  those comments without 

using a predefined lexica of labeled words. 

 

References: 

 

1.  R.  Socher  et  al.,  “Semi-Supervised  Recursive  Autoencoders  for  Predicting  Sentiment 

Distributions”,EMNLP  '11  Proceedings  of  the  Conference  on  Empirical  Methods  in  Natural 

Language Processing. 

2. S. Asur et al., “Predicting the Future With Social Media”,arXiv:1003.5699. 

3. R. Sharda et al., “Forecasting Box-Office Receipts of Motion Pictures Using Neural 

Networks”, CiteSeerX 2002. 

4. http://www.businessinsider.com/apple-and-samsung-just-revealed-their-exact-us-sales-figures-

for-the-first-ever-time-2012-8 

 

 

