1 

Film Classification by Trailer Features 

Edmund Helmer and Qinghui Ji 
December 14, 2012 

Introduction 
1. 
The Matrix, a sci-fi film released in 1999, was famous for telling viewers in its trailer that: 
“Unfortunately, no one can be told what the Matrix is. You have to see it for yourself.” And 
film-goers did, resulting in over $460 Million worldwide box office gross, four Academy Award 
wins, and an 87% critic approval rate (according to Rotten Tomatoes). The decision to see any 
film is based on many factors: cast, critical opinion, recommendations of our friends; but often 
it’s simply because we like the trailer. So we ask the question, what information can a machine 
extract from trailers? 
For this paper, we have collected a set of trailers (312 with video, 100 with subtitles), 
extracted features from the video feeds and the subtitle texts, and attempted to classify the genre 
and MPAA rating of each film. 
2.  Data 
2a. 
Video Features 
The potential feature space from a trailer is massive, including an RGB tuple for every pixel for 
every frame of every trailer, as well as potential object detection. In order to prune the space into 
a more manageable set, we used three main categories of video features: (1) Mean Frames, (2) 
Scene Variation, (3) Face Recognition. To obtain the trailers, we used Python to scrape the-
numbers.com, film site, to download all trailers that the site hosts (312); and the Python module 
OpenCV provided the tools to complete the video analysis. 
(1) To create what we call “Mean Frames,” for each pixel location, we averaged all 
values of that pixel over the frames of the trailers, and in effect created a single “blurred” image 
for each trailer. Fig. 1 shows two example Mean Frames: Finding Nemo and the recent release, 
Lincoln. While image blurring is a standard technique used for background detection,1 as far as 
we know, the creation of mean frames is an original concept in visual analysis, though similar to 
key-frame detection (described in more detail later). 

	  

 
Fig. 1: Mean Frames of Finding Nemo, Lincoln 
1	  

 

From the Mean Frames, we extracted the RGB histograms, which represent the 
distribution of red, green, and blue used in the trailer, as shown in Fig. 2. Each color’s vector of 
intensities were then recorded as features. 

2 

 

 
Fig. 2: Mean Histograms Finding Nemo, Lincoln 
(2) Key frame generation is a standard task in video processing, which splits any video 
file into its separate scenes, and key frames are the splitting points. One method used to create 
key frames is to measure the change in each pixel’s RGB values between each consecutive 
frames, and returns the frames following the highest changes.2 We used this idea to measure the 
number of scene changes by keeping an average of the frame changes over each trailer, with the 
idea that some genres or MPAA ratings may be described by faster or slower cutting of scenes. 
(3) Finally, we hypothesized that some genres and MPAA ratings would feature more or 
fewer people in their trailers, and that face recognition algorithms would provide a reasonable 
proxy for this. Fig. 3 demonstrates face recognition from one trailer of Harry Potter and the 
Deathly Hallows: Part 2, one example of the algorithm in process. 

 
Fig. 3: Face recognition from Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows: Part 2 

 
2b. 
Text Features 
Words spoken in a trailer are text files downloaded from the Youtube closed-caption database 
and was read into a matrix, similar to the ‘spam’ dataset. Each row is one sample and each 
column is a word. Due to the scarcity of English subtitle resource online, we downloaded 
Spanish versions. First we deleted all the words that are less than two characters. Then using 
TreeTagger packages from University of Stuttgart, we scrubbed all the words: words like articles 
(‘el’), preposition (‘y’) and proper noun(‘Michael’) were removed; noun and verbs were then 
adjusted to their standard forms (‘acercara’, ‘acercarnos’ and ‘acercarte’ to ‘acercar’). At the end, 
we reduced the number of words from 4739 to 3563. 
3.  Models and Evaluation 
3.a   Video Features 
	  

2	  

The features extracted from the video provided some separation without any complex analysis, 
as shown in Fig. 4, a mapping of Genre and MPAA Rating by percent of time in the trailer faces 
appeared (“FaceTime”), and the average brightness of the trailer (“Brightness”). 
 

3 

 

Fig. 4: MPAA Rating and Genre mapped to FaceTime and Brightness. 

 
 
The most easily seen results are that: G rated films tend to skew left, which turns out to 
be because they heavily involve animated features with non-human characters; Drama and 
Comedy feature the most human content; Horror films use the least amount of brightness in the 
trailers. 
To attempt classification, we applied 3 different main classification algorithms: naïve 
Bayes, Multi-Class Support Vector Machine, and Random Forest. Although the original feature 
space included the entire histogram of RGB values stemming from each film’s Mean Frame, we 
found that results were improved (even over tuning) by only using the mean values of each color 
as features, and that using the entire vector of information for each color led to overfitting. The 
Support Vector machine was tested over linear, radial basis, sigmoid, and polynomial kernels, as 
well as tuned by γ and cost. The Random Forest was only tuned to include enough trees to reach 
convergence, and naïve Bayes was run without tuning. 
Shown below, the Multi-Class Support Vector Machine has the highest accuracy in 
predicting genre, and Random Forest has the highest accuracy in predicting MPAA Rating. 
 

	  
3	  
Fig. 5: Classification Accuracy Histograms of Test Accuracy (1000 iterations, 80% training) on MPAA and Genre 
 

4 

Table 1: Mean Accuracy Rate across Classifiers Predicting MPAA Rating by Video Features 
Multinomial 
MLE 
Random Forest 
SVM 
Naive Bayes 

0.3897* 
0.3887* 
0.3244 
0.351 
0.3341 
* - p-value < 10-20 comparing difference in mean accuracy to the MLE classification. 
 
Table 2: Mean Accuracy Rate across Classifiers Predicting MPAA Rating by Video Features 
Multinomial 
MLE 
Random Forest 
SVM 
Naive Bayes 

0.3897* 
0.3887* 
0.3341 
0.3244 
0.351 
* - p-value < 10-20 comparing difference in mean accuracy to the MLE classification. 
 
The classification techniques were compared to sampling randomly from a multinomial 
distribution (as parameterized by the training set distributions), and compared to an MLE 
estimate (which is selecting the mode of the training tags). The algorithms were run selecting an 
80%/20% training/testing split over 1000 iterations, and all classification algorithms showed 
statistical significance, except naïve Bayes in predicting MPAA. 
 
Table 3: Mean Accuracy Rate across Classifiers Predicting Genre by Text Features 
Naive Bayes 
SVM 
Random Forest 
MLE 
Multinomial 

0.3359* 
0.4032* 
0.4366* 
0.2208 
0.2760 
* - p-value < 10-20 comparing difference in mean accuracy to the MLE classification. 
 

3.b   Text Features 
For subtitle features, we cleaned the data set as described above. Then, as in video data, we ran 
the same three classifiers on subtitle dataset, and compared over 100 iterations with an 80%/20% 
training/testing split on the data. The Random Forest accuracy rate on testing was 33.95%. Using 
a linear Kernel SVM, we gained a testing accuracy rate of 17%, a mean improvement over MLE, 
but without statistical significance. And using naïve Bayes, we did not beat the MLE estimate. 
We also compared results to using the bag of words approach, without cleaning the data first, but 
found that the cleaned data set had more accuracy, and was computationally far more efficient. 

	  

4	  
Fig. 6: Classification Accuracy Histograms  

 

5 

 

Thriller 
Pronto 

 

 

SVM 

Naive Bayes 

Sci-Fi 
Bien 

of Test Accuracy (1000 iterations, 80% training) 
 
Random Forest 
MLE 
Multinomial 
0.3395* 
0.0071 
0.066 
0.17 
0.1745 
* - p-value < 10-20 comparing difference in means to the MLE classification. 
1 𝑥! = 𝑤 1 𝑦! = 𝑐 + 1
𝑃 𝑥 = 𝑤 𝑦 = 𝑐 =
!!!!!
!!!!
We also generated the top 1-gram that was most indicative of the each class, for 
1 𝑦! = 𝑐 𝑛! + 𝑛
each word w, given a certain class, c.  
!!!!
Action  Adventure  Animation  Comedy  Drama  Horror  Musical 
Solo 
Bien 
Hacer 
Sexo 
Nuevo 
Solo 
Vida 
 
4. 
Further Work 
4.a 
Larger Dataset 
The selection of trailers from the-numbers only presented 312 observations, and the number of 
trailers found with Spanish Subtitles only numbered 100. A more complex scraping tool would 
allow us to download more trailers for video processing, and as closed-captioning becomes a 
higher priority, it may become easier to find trailers with subtitles (in Spanish or in English). 
 
 
4.b  More Features and Ensemble Learning 
Other features from the trailer such as audio, including volume, length and key tune of the 
background music could be included into the model for better results. 
Another feature we considered was mapping trailer cuts to the time sample from the 
original movie. The core idea is that some trailers “spoil” more of a movie than others, which 
when quantified may divide films in a meaningful way, either by genre or MPAA rating, or by 
other potential taggings such as critical reception. 
Finally, an ensemble of the subtitle and video classification could be achieved if the 
datasets were generated with more or complete overlap. 
5.  References 
1 - Zang, Qi, and Reinhard Klette. "Robust background subtraction and maintenance." Pattern 
Recognition, 2004. ICPR 2004. Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on. Vol. 2. 
IEEE, 2004. 
2 - Liu, Lijie, and Guoliang Fan. "Combined key-frame extraction and object-based video 
segmentation." Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, IEEE Transactions on 15.7 (2005): 
869-884. 
	  
5	  

