Machine Learning Application On Detecting 
Nudity In Images 

  Yong Lin, Yujun Wu 

1.	  Introduction 
We built a mobile app that help people get opinions and recommendations from their social network. 
The  app  enables  people  to  create  picture  poll  and  have  friends  to  vote  on  it.  Since  it  contains 
user-generated content,  it  is essential  to censor  the content  to ensure  that  there  is no pornographic 
content  in  the  picture. Monitoring  all  the  content  created  in  the  app merely  by  human  is  labor  cost. 
Therefore, we wanted to apply the knowledge learned from machine learning class to help detect the 
pornographic  pictures  with  some  learning  algorithms.  Our  algorithm  should  be  able  to  detect  the 
suspected pornographic picture, which could be censored by app admin in the end. 
 
We  collected  the  preliminary  training  examples(labeled  images)  from  online  adult  websites.  The 
nudity  detection  includes  skin  region  recognition,  feature  extraction  and  image  classification.  Two 
classification  methods  are  applied,  which  are  classification  by  skin  area  and  classification  by 
regionization. Comparing the results, classification by regioniaztion is significantly better. 
2.Dataset 
For the  training data set, we collected 6026 normal pictures, marked as negative samples and 8917 
pornographic pictures, marked as positive samples. The normal pictures consist of the categories of 
Man’s  Fashion,  Women’s  Fashion,  Design,  Food,  Travel.  The  size  of  the  picture  varies  from  1k  to 
100k. 991 positive images and 670 negative images are used as the testing set. 
 
3.	  Classification	  by	  skin	  area	  
 
3.1	   	  Skin	  Detection	  
The most important feature that provides clues to image content is color. Color is a low level feature, 
which  makes 
time  object 
for  real- 
therefore  suitable 
inexpensive  and 
it  computationally 
characterization, detection and localization (Martinkauppi, 2002). 
 
 
 
 
Nudity  often  consists  of  showing  naked  persons,  special  shots  of  sexual  organs,  or  a  picture  of 
sexual intercourse (Lin et al., 2003). The presence of large skin area is a main trait of these pictures. 
Therefore,  skin  color  is  a  basic  feature  used  in  nudity  detection.  A  disadvantage  of  systems  using 
color  as  a  primary  feature  is  that  the  systems  will  not  work  with  black  and  white  images.  However, 
nude images are rarely in black and white. 
 
 
 
 
The simplest methods in skin detection define or assume skin color to have a certain range or values 
in  some  coordinates  of  a  color  space.  The  RGB  color  space  is  one  of  the  most  widely  used  color 
spaces for storing and processing digital  image. However, the RGB color space alone  is not reliable 

for  identifying  skin-colored  pixels  since  it  represents  not  only  color  but  also  luminance.  Skin 
luminance  may  vary  within  and  across  persons  due  to  ambient  lighting  so  it  is  not  dependable  for 
segmenting skin and non-skin regions. Chromatic colors are more reliable and these are obtained by 
eliminating luminance through some form of transformation. Some studies show that HSV is invariant 
to highlights at white light sources, to matte surfaces, and ambient lighting. Thus, the color space we 
used in this article is HSV.   
 
By referring to prior work from others and trial-errors, a set of threshold values in HSV color space is 
set up. Hue(H) =100 ~ 130, Saturation(S) =14 ~ 140, Value(V) = 89 ~ 255. This threshold works very 
well. It has 90% accuracy rate with 15% false positive rate. 
 
With  this  skin  pixel  recognition  mechanism  as  a  building  block,  some  high  level  features  can  be 
extracted in this experiment. 
 
3.2	  Features 
3.2.1.	  Normalized	  skin	  size	    
Normalized skin size is defined by the percentage of skin pixels relative to the image size. It is one of 
the main features that affect the probability of an image being nude or not. The larger the percentage 
of skin is, the higher the probability that an image will be classified nude.   
 
3.2.2.	  Normalized	  n-­‐th	  largest	  connected	  skin	  area	  size	  
Normalized  n-th  largest  connected  skin  area  size  is  defined  as  the  ratio  between  the  number  of 
pixels in the n-th largest skin area to the total skin pixel count in the image. We take 1, 2 and 3 as n in 
this study. These features mainly characterize the concentration of skin area because nudity pictures 
always show grouped skin pixels rather than scattered skin pixels. All the 4 features were normalized 
so they are not affected by their scale factor.   
 
3.2.3.	  Normalized	  average	  distance	  among	  the	  three	  largest	  connected	  skin	  areas	   	  
The  relative  distance  among  connected  skin  areas  can  characterize  the  typical  pattern  of  a 
pornographic  picture.  One  feature  was  the  normalized  average  distance  among  the  three  largest 
connected skin areas. The steps to extract this feature was as follows: 1) find the geometric centers 
of the three largest skin areas in an image; 2) calculate the distances between any two of these three 
centers; 3) average the three distances into a value 4) divide this value by the diagonal length of the 
image.     
	  
3.3	  Classificaiton 
3.3.1	  Logistic	  Regression 
The Hessian H of the log-likelihood function for the logistic regression was calculated. H was used in 
the Newton Method to update theta.Consider it as converged when the difference between two theta 
was less than 0.0000001.   
 
3.3.2	  Gaussian	  Discriminative	  Analysis	  
Since the input feature x are continuous-valued random variables, we applied the GDA model to train 

the data. The parameters,0,1 were calculated and the training error obtained was 0.4372, which was 
unacceptable high. 
 
3.3.3	  Bayes	  Naive	  
In  this  study,  Bayes  Naive  algorithm  was  applied  to  train  our  model  with  the  4  above-mentioned 
features  extracted.  Since  Naive  Bayes  algorithm  is  only  applicable  to  discrete  features  while  the 
above-mentioned features are continuous, discretization must be applied to preprocess our features. 
In this study, the continuous features were evenly discretized into a scale of 0 to 10. Concretely, the 
normalized values were scaled up by a factor of 10 and then rounded out to the nearest integer. 
 
3.3.4	  SVM	  
Support Vector Machine algorithm with a gaussian kernal (sigma = 1) was applied to train our model.   
 
4.	  Classification	  by	  regionization 
4.1.	  Feature	  Extraction 
4.1.1	  Skin	  filtering 
Since we only care about how many skin pixels an image contains and how they are distributed 
across the image, we process all the images by filtering the skin pixels. For each sample image, 
a matrix with the same size as the image was created.   Each element in this matrix corresponds 
to a pixel in the image. After applying a skin-pixel filter mentioned in Section 3.1 on all the pixels 
in  the  image  and  storing  the  answers  in  this  matrix,  we  can  get  a  binary  matrix  of  which  each 
element stores 1 or 0 representing whether its corresponding pixel in the image is considered as 
a  skin  pixel  or  not.  Figure  2  shows  the  visualization  of  this  binary  matrix  converted  from  its 
original  image  (as  shown  in  Figure  1).  The  white  regions  represent  skin  pixels  and  the  black 
regions represent non-skin pixels. 

Figure	  1	  .	  Original	  image	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   	   Figure	  2.	  A	  binary(black	  &	  white)	  matrix	  visualization	  for	  skin	  pixels	  
 
	  
 
4.1.2	  Regionization	  
In  order  to  represent  the  distribution  of  skin  pixels  across  an  image,  recording  whether  a  pixel  is  a 

skin pixel for all pixels in images is an exhaustive approach. However, images will have different size 
therefore  different  numbers  of  pixels.  Moreover,  taking  information  about  all  pixels  individually  as 
features will definitely make a very high VC dimension. This  is a cause  for overfitting. To reduce  the 
number of features and VC dimension, we chose a 25-d vector to represent skin distribution.   
 
The process of downsizing an image with any size to a 5 x 5 matrix(i.e. 25-d vector by 
concatenating rows or cols) is called regionization. Specifically, the way to regionize an image is 
simple. First thing first, partition the binary matrix obtained in Section 5.1 into 5x5 regions (as 
shown in Figure 3). Secondly, average the binary values within each region and put these 
average values into a 25-d vector in row-first order. Figure 4 gives a visualization of this 
averaging process. These are the two steps to do the regionization to an image. With 
regionization, features representing the distribution and concentration of skin pixels in an image 
can be extracted.   

Figure	  3.	  Partition	  a	  binary	  image	  into	  5x5	  blocks	   	   	   Figure	  4.	  The	  visualization	  of	  the	  result	  of	  regionization	  
 
 
4.2	  Classification	  
After downsizing all the images into a 5x5 matrix of skin proportions, all the data set were divided 
into 10 divisions. 9 of them were used as training set by the SVM with Guassian kernal (sigma = 
1.75) and the rest 1 was used as a test group. The best hypothesis is obtained by 10-fold cross 
validation.   
 

5.	  Result	   	  

5.1	  Classification	  by	  skin	  area	  
With  features  characterizing  skin  areas  and  their  relative  distance,  the  best  training  error  obtained 
among  logistic  regression,  Gaussian  discriminative  analysis.  Naïve  Bayes  and  SVM  was  0.2810, 
which was very high. But it led to the exploration of classification by regionization, which significantly 
improved the performance. 

 
5.2	  Classification	  by	  regionization	  
With  the  features  extracted  by  5  x  5  regionization,  the  optimal  performance  for  the SVM model  has 
the accuracy of 92.44% on training set and accuracy of 81.71% in testing. It has false positive rate of 
23.82% and false negative rate of 14.96%.   
6.	  Reference 
Martinkauppi, B. 2002. Face Colour Under varying Illumination. [online]. Available: 
http://herkules.oulu.fi/isbn9514267885/isbn9514267885 .p df. (02 October 2003)   
 
 
Lin, Y., Tseng, H. & Fuh, C. Pornography Detection Using Support Vector Machine. 16th IPPR 
Conference on Computer Vision, Graphics and Image Processing (CVGIP 2003). 
Y. Xu, B. Li, X. Xue, and H. Lu. Region-based pornographic image detection. IEEE 7th Workshop on 
Multimedia Signal Processing (MMSP), pages 1–4, November 2005. 
J. Yang, Y.-G. Jiang, A. G. Hauptmann, and C.-W. Ngo. Evaluating bag-of-visual-words 
representations in scene classification. In ACM Multimedia Information Retrieval (MIR), pages 
197–206, New York, NY, USA, 2007. ACM. 
 
 

