Automatic detection and of dipoles in large area SQUID
magnetometry

Lisa Qian

December 14, 2012

1

Introduction

1.1 Scanning SQUID magnetometry

Scanning SQUID magnetometry is a powerful tool for metrology of individual nano-
magnets because of its incredible ﬂux sensitivity (as low as 100 electron spins) and
non-invasive nature. With micron-sized pick-up loops, this technique has been used to
study individual magnetic dipoles in a variety of systems such as magnetotactic bacteria,
nanofabricated bar magnets, and naturally occurring nanomagnetic patches in complex
oxide heterostructures. Figure 1a shows a cartoon of a scanning SQUID magnetometer
over individual point dipoles. A DC magnetometry image of a silicon substrate contain-
ing individual magnetotactic bacteria is shown in Figure 1b, where the individual dipole
orientations are clearly visible. Such an image is a convolution of the local magnetic ﬁeld
component perpendicular to the pick up loop with the point spread function deﬁned by
the pick up loop geometry.

Figure 1: (a) Cartoon of a scanning SQUID imaging magnetic dipoles. (b) A typical
magnetometry image, which is a convolution of the sample’s local magnetic ﬁeld with
the SQUID pick up loop shown in (a).

1

(a)5μmpickup loop20μm  mΦ0−18.5−60618.0(b)Using both ﬁne and course motion scanners, we can cover a sample area as large
as 5mm×5mm. Each scan can be as large as 300µm×300µm, and often contain many
individual dipoles that may be clustered together. Once a scan is taken, we often need
to analyze properties of each individual dipole such as their dipole moments. Current
practice is to identify each dipole by eye, manually crop the image, and send the cropped
image to an analysis program.
In crowded images, selection of dipoles is a slow and
monotonous process. In addition to ﬁnding each dipole, the crop window, or bounding
box, for each dipole is also of importance. Since magnetic ﬁelds are long range, we want
to make the bounding box as large as possible without picking up magnetic signals from
neighboring dipoles or uneven background.
The goal of this pro ject is to automatically detect magnetic dipoles given a large
area magnetometry scan and to determine the appropriately sized bounding box.

2 Supervised learning

The idea is to go through the entire large area scan with a sliding box of ﬁxed dimensions.
Each image is an example and is classiﬁed as either a part of a dipole (1) or not (0).
Because stronger dipoles extend across more space than weaker dipoles, many boxes
classiﬁed as (1) might be needed to cover an entire dipole. At the end, neighboring “1
boxes are merged to form the bounding box for a dipole.

2.1 Challenges

Classiﬁcation and feature design for this pro ject was challenging for several reasons.
First, many magnetometry scans have slowly varying background signals that can be on
the order of the dipolar signals themselves. But because the dipolar ﬁelds themselves are
long range, it is often challenging to properly remove background ﬁelds while preserving
the structure of the dipoles. Second, the strengths of the dipoles we measure vary across
roughly four orders of magnitude (from 105µB to 109µB ). Thus the spatial extent of the
dipoles also vary greatly, ranging from approximately 5µm×5µm for the weakest dipoles
to 35µm×35µm for the strongest ones. Initially I used a very large feature vector to
cover all the entire range of pixel intensity, along with sliding boxes of varying sizes.
Both of these ideas proved to be not computationally feasible.

2.2 Feature selection and SVM

The background problem was solved by using the gradient of the large area scan instead
of the magnetometry image itself. Figure 2 shows a magnetometry image with partic-
ularly strong background ﬁelds and how simply taking the gradient nearly completely
removes the background. To obtain training/test examples, I take the gradient of the
large area magnetometry scan and go through this gradient image with a sliding window
as described previously.
The feature vector for each image obtained through with the sliding window is a
histogram of pixel intensity of that image. I discretize the feature vector linearly from

2

-10mΦ0/µm to +10mΦ0/mum in increments of 0.1mΦ0/mum. For a given training/test
example, I count up the number of pixels in that example corresponding to each dis-
cretization level. This results in a length 200 sparse feature vector. I used an SVM to
train and classify.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2: (a)Large area magnetometry scan, without background removal. (b)The
gradient of (a), without additional background ﬁltering.

2.3 Training and test examples

I collected training samples by looking at a total of seven large area scans. These scans
contain a total of 193 dipoles. To get a good variety of dipoles, I chose large area scans
taken at diﬀerent heights and with levels of crowdedness. A large scan image is usually
around 300 pixels × 400 pixels and covers about 300µm×300µm. The size of the sliding
window is set to 22×26 pixels, which is the size of the smallest dipole I found amongst
the seven large area scans I looked at. For training examples, I skipped by 15 pixels
between each image. For test data, I skipped by 10 pixels between images.
It is important to note that since dipolar ﬁelds are long range, there is no precise
way of determining when a dipole “ends and draw the appropriate bounding box. In my
work here, I labeled an example as ‘0’ when any stray dipolar ﬁelds are on the order of
the noise level of the background.

3 Results

3.1 Leave one out cross-validation

Because I had a limited sample size (seven large area scans), I used LOOCV to train, test
and compare my models. Using an SVM with a polynomial kernel gives 81% precision
and 83% recall. An SVM with a Gaussian kernel gives 85% precision and 87% recall.
Only four false positives were found among all 7 large are scans.
These results are very satisfactory - the dipoles that were missed by the classiﬁer
were very weak and right at the noise level. Figure 3 a and c show the results of the
model on two large area scans. Each of these scans were classiﬁed using an SVM with
Gaussian kernel trained on the other six scans. Further improvements could be made
by including more positive training data.

3

3.2 Merging to form bounding box

The ﬁnal step is to merge neighboring test images that have been classiﬁed as ‘1’ (part
of a dipole) to form the ﬁnal bounding box for the dipoles. Figure 3 b and d show the
ﬁnal results. While this process works well on scans with sparse dipoles (b), it does not
work well for crowded scans (d). This is because the sliding window is currently quite
large and can cover more than one dipole at a time in crowded images.
While this problem will be alleviated using a smaller window size (breaking up the
scan into more and smaller test images), it will always be a problem because of the long
range nature of the dipolar ﬁelds. When the dipoles are crowded, it becomes impossible
to separate out individual dipoles from a cluster. In these cases, I would eventually like
to identify the cluster as a separate classiﬁcation.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 3: (a)Results of SVM classiﬁcation on a large area magnetometry scan. (b)After
merging to form one bounding box for each dipole. (c) - (d)The same for another, more
crowded scan.

4

µmµm  0100200300050100150200250mΦ0−2−1.5−1−0.500.511.52µmµm  0100200300050100150200250mΦ0−2−1.5−1−0.500.511.52µmµm  050100150050100150mΦ0−2−1.5−1−0.500.511.52µmµm  050100150050100150mΦ0−2−1.5−1−0.500.511.523.3 Conclusions

In this pro ject, I successfully trained an SVM classiﬁer to automatically detect dipoles in
a large area SQUID magnetometry image. Using a Gaussian kernel yields slightly better
results over a polynomial kernel, with a precision of 85% and recall of 87%. These results
are satisfactory and can be improved by including more positive training examples and
reducing the sliding window size. Signiﬁcant improvements still need to be made to draw
appropriate bounding boxes in crowded images.

5

