Stock Market Forecasting Using Machine Learning Algorithms 

Shunrong Shen, Haomiao Jiang 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Stanford University 
{conank,hjiang36}@stanford.edu 

Tongda Zhang 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
Stanford University 
tdzhang@stanford.edu

 
 

Abstract—Prediction of  stock market  is a  long-time  attractive 
topic  to  researchers  from  different  fields.  In  particular, 
numerous  studies  have  been  conducted  to  predict  the  movement 
of  stock  market  using  machine  learning  algorithms  such  as 
support  vector  machine  (SVM)  and  reinforcement  learning.  In 
this project, we  propose  a  new prediction  algorithm  that  exploits 
the temporal correlation among global stock markets and various 
financial  products  to  predict  the  next-day  stock  trend  with  the 
aid  of  SVM.  Numerical  results  indicate  a  prediction  accuracy  of 
74.4%  in  NASDAQ,  76%  in  S&P500  and  77.6%  in  DJIA.  The 
same  algorithm 
is  also  applied  with  different  regression 
algorithms  to  trace  the  actual  increment  in  the  markets.  Finally, 
a simple trading model is established to study the performance of 
the proposed prediction algorithm against other benchmarks.   

is  to  our  belief  that  data  of  oversea  stock  and  other  financial 
markets,  especially  those  having  strong  temporal  correlation 
with  the  upcoming  US  trading  day,  should  be  useful  to 
machine  learning  based  predictor,  and  our  speculation  is 
verified by numerical results. 

The  rest  of  the  report  is  organized  as  following.  Section  II 
presents  our  algorithm  in  details,  including  the  fundamental 
principle of our algorithm, data collection and feature selection. 
Numerical results are shown in Section III followed by analysis 
and discussions. In Section IV, we established a simple  trading 
model  to  demonstrate  the  capability  of  the  proposed  algorithm 
in  increasing  profit  in  NASDAQ.  Section  V  summarizes  the 
whole report.  

I. 

INTRODUCTION  

II.  ALGORITHMS 

Prediction  of  stock  trend  has  long  been  an  intriguing  topic 
and  is  extensively  studied  by  researchers  from  different  fields. 
Machine learning, a well-established algorithm in a wide range 
of  applications,  has  been  extensively  studied  for  its  potentials 
in  prediction  of  financial  markets.  Popular  algorithms, 
including  support  vector  machine  (SVM)  and  reinforcement 
learning, have been reported to be quite effective  in tracing the 
stock  market  and  help  maximizing  the  profit  of  stock  option 
purchase  while  keep  the  risk  low  [1-2].  However,  in  many  of 
these  literatures,  the  features  selected  for  the  inputs  to  the 
machine  learning  algorithms  are  mostly  derived  from  the  data 
within  the  same  market  under  concern.  Such  isolation  leaves 
out  important  information  carried  by  other  entities  and  make 
the  prediction  result  more  vulnerable  to  local  perturbations. 
Efforts  have  been  done 
to  break 
the  boundaries  by 
incorporating  external  information  through  fresh  financial 
news  or  personal  internet  posts  such  as  Twitter.  These 
approaches,  known  as  sentiment  analysis,  replies  on  the 
attitudes  of  several  key  figures  or  successful  analysts  in  the 
markets  to  interpolate  the  minds  of  general  investors.  Despite 
its  success  in  some  occasions,  sentiment  analysis  may  fail 
when  some  of  the  people  are  biased,  or  positive  opinions 
follow  past  good  performance  instead of  suggesting promising 
future markets.  

In  this  project,  we  propose  the  use  of  global  stock  data  in 
associate  with  data  of  other  financial  products  as  the  input 
features  to  machine  learning  algorithms  such  as  SVM.  In 
particular,  we  are  interested  in  the  correlation  between  the 
closing prices of the markets that stop trading right before or at 
the  beginning  of  US  markets.  As  the  connections  between 
worldwide  economies  are  tightened  by  globalization,  external 
perturbations to the financial markets are no longer domestic. It 

A.  Basic Principles 

Globalization deepens  the  interaction between  the  financial 
markets  around  the  world.  Shock  wave  of  US  financial  crisis 
hit  the  economy  of  almost  every  country  and  debt  crisis 
originated  in  Greece  brought  down  all  major  stock  indices. 
Nowadays,  no  financial  market  is  isolated.  Economic  data, 
political perturbation and any other oversea affairs could cause 
dramatic  fluctuation  in  domestic  markets.  Therefore,  in  this 
project,  we  propose  to  use  world  major  stock  indices  as  input 
features for our machine learning based predictor. In particular, 
the oversea markets  that closes  right before or at the beginning 
of  the  US  market  trading  should  provide  valuable  information 
on  the  trend  of  coming  US  trading  day,  as  their  movements 
already  account  for  possible  market  sentiment  on  latest 
economic news or response to progress in major world affairs.  

Fig. 1.  World financial markets. 

 

In addition  to stock markets, commodity prices and  foreign 
currency  data  are  also  listed  as  potential  features,  as  different 
financial  markets  are  interconnected.  For  instance,  slowdown 
in US economy will definitely cause a drop in US stock market. 
But  at  the  same  time, USD  and  JPY will  increase with  respect 
to  its  peers  as  people  seek  for  asset  havens.  Such  interplay 
implies  the  underlying  relationship  between  these  financial 
products  and  the  possibility  of  using  one  or  some  of  them  to 
predict the move of the other ones. 

B.  Data collection 

The  data  set  used  in  this  project  is  collected  from  [3].  It 
contains  16  sources  as  listed  in  Table  I  and  covers  daily  price 
from  04-Jan-2000  to  25-  Oct  -2012:  Since  the  markets  are 
closed on holidays which vary from country to country, we use 
NASDAQ  as  a  basis  for  data  alignment  and  missing  data  in 
other data sources is replaced by linear interpolation.  

TABLE I.  

DATA SOURCE 

Stock 

Currency 

Commodity 

NASDAQ,  DJIA,  S&P  500,  Nikkei  225, 
Hang Seng index, FTSE100, DAX, ASX 
EUR, AUD, JPY, USD 
Silver, 
Platinum, 
GoldC:\Dropbox\CS229 Project 

Oil, 

 

C.  Feature selection 

In  this  project,  we  focus  on  the  prediction  of  the  trend  of 
stock  market  (either  increase  or  decrease).  Therefore,  the 
change  of  a  feature  over  time  is  more  important  than  the 
absolute  value  of  each  feature.  We  define  xi(t),  where  i  ∈ 
{1,2,...,  16},  to  be  feature  i  at  time  t.  The  feature  matrix  is 
given by  

F = (X1, X2, ..., Xn)T                              (1) 

where  

Xt = (x1(t),x2(t),...,x16(t))                        (2) 

The  new  feature which  is  the difference between  two  daily 
prices can be calculated by  

∇δxi(t) = xi(t) − xi(t −δ)                          (3) 

                   ∇δ X (t)  = X (t) − X (t − δ) 

= (∇δ x1(t), ∇δ x2(t), · · · ∇δ x16(t))T       (4) 

∇δ F     = (∇δX(δ + 1), ∇δX(δ + 2), ..., ∇δX(n))      (5) 

Due  to  the  difference  in  market  value  and  basis  of  each 
market,  the  differential  values  calculated  above  can  vary  in  a 
wide  range.  To  make  them  comparable,  the  features  are 
normalized as following:  

and the normalization can be implemented as:  

(6) 

                  (7) 

As  discussed  above,  the  performance  of  a  stock  market 
predictor  heavily  depends  on  the  correlation  between  the  data 
used  for  training  and  the  current  input  for  prediction. 
Intuitively,  if  the  trend of  stock price  is  always  an  extension  to 
yesterday,  the  accuracy  of  prediction  should be  fairly  high.  To 
select  input  features  with  high  temporal  correlation,  we 
calculated  the autocorrelation and cross-correlation of different 
market  trends  (increase  or  decrease).  The  results  shown  in 
Figure 2 use NASDAQ as the base market.  

 

Fig. 2.  Autocorrelation  and  cross-correlation  of  market 
NASDAQ as a base. 

trends  using 

It  can  be  seen  from  the  graph  that  the  autocorrelation  of 
NASDAQ  daily  trend  is  only  non-zero  at  the  origin  based  on 
which we may conclude that the trend of NASDAQ daily index 
is  approximately  a  Markov  process.  Hence,  past  data  of 
NASDAQ  will  not  provide  much  insight  to  its  future 
movement. The same conclusion could be made on many other 
data sources whose cross-correlation with NASDAQ is close to 
zero.  Although  the  trend  of  DJIA  and  S&P500  have  strong 
correlation  with  NASDAQ  given  the  data  are  on  same  day, 
they  are  not  available  by  the  time  they  are  needed  for 
prediction.  However,  data  sources  such  as  DAX  AUD  and 
some  other  markets  are  promising  features  for  our  predictor 
built  by machine  learning  algorithm  as  they  have  relative  high 
correlation  with  NASDAQ  at  the  origin  and  their  data  is 
available  before  or  at  the  beginning  of  the  US  market  trading 
time. This observation actually confirms our  forecast principle, 
as  discussed  in  previous  sections,  about  the  inter-connection 
between  global  markets  and  how  the  information  reflected  by 
their  movements  can  be  beneficial  to  the  prediction  of  US 
stock markets.  

In addition  to  the correlation of daily market movements,  it 
is  also  worth  investigating  the  correlation  of  market  trends  in 
longer  term,  which  may  also  offer  valuable  information  for 
predicting  future  price  [4-5].  To  study  this,  δ  in  Eq.  (3)  is 
varied from 1 day to 50 days, and  part of the results are plotted 
in  Figure  3.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  graph,  temporal 
correlations  between  the  markets  increase  with  the  time 

-505-0.200.20.40.60.811.2DelayCross-correlation with respect to NASDAQ  NASDAQS&P500DJIAHang SengNikkei225FTSE100DAXASXGold PMSilverPlatinum PMPalladium PMOilAUDEuroJPYwindow δ over which the trends of stock indices are calculated. 
One  explanation  for  this phenomenon  is  that  the  calculation  in 
Eq.  (3) makes  the  time  spans  of  the  outputs  overlap  with  each 
other  and 
temporal  correlations. 
the 
increase 
therefore 
Moreover,  the  operation  also  implicitly  conduct  an  averaging 
on  the  data  within  the  interval  which  effectively  removes  the 
noise  and  the  underlying  correlation  between  the  markets 
become clearer.   

The result of this experiment supports the analysis of cross-
correlation. Hence, we  are  convinced  that  index  value  of other 
stock  markets  and  commodity  prices  can  provide  useful 
information in the prediction process. 

2) 

Long Term Prediction 
Besides  daily  movement,  sometimes  we  also  care  about 
prediction  results  for  longer  terms.  Here,  we  define  our 
problem  as  predicting 
the  sign  of  difference  between 
tomorrow’s index value with respect to that of certain days ago. 
We use SVM as a  training model and the prediction accuracies 
under different time spans are shown in Figure 5.  

 

Fig. 5.  Accuracy of Long Term Prediction 

 

Fig. 3.  Autocorrelation  and  cross-correlation  of  market  trends  with  different 
time spans. 

Given  all  possible  features,  we  implemented  forward 
feature  selection algorithm  to select the  features  that contribute 
most  to  the  accuracy  of  prediction  using  different  machine 
learning  algorithms.  Detail  results  are  presented  in  the  next 
section.  As  expected,  a  combination  of  daily market  trend  and 
long term movement provide the best result.  

III.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

A.  Trend Prediction 

1) 

Single Feature Prediction 
In  section  2,  we  used  cross-correlation  to  estimate  the 
importance of each  feature. To verify  the  information given by 
correlation  analysis,  we  use  individual  feature  to  predict  daily 
NASDAQ  index  trend. The  prediction accuracy  by  each  single 
feature is shown in Figure 4.  

From  the  figure,  we  can  see  that  prediction  accuracy 
increases when  time  span becomes  longer. This  is because  that 
the  longer  the period  is,  the more  information we  have   and  the 
higher  resistance  of  our  prediction  to  noise.  At  last,  we  can 
reach 85% accuracy when time spam gets longer than 30 days. 

Actually,  we  can  re-paraphrase  this  problem  as  estimation 
of    {               } ,  where                      .  This 
corresponds  to  the  after-mentioned regression problem of daily 
stock market movements. 

3)  Multi-Feature Prediction 
Using  the  features  described  in  section  2,  we  compare  the 
prediction  accuracies  of  SVM  algorithm  and  MART  (a 
decision  tree  based  boosting  algorithm).  The  prediction  results 
are shown in Table 2. 

TABLE II.  

ONE-DAY PREDICTION ACCURACY 

 

Top 4 Features 

All Features 

SVM 

MART 

 

74.4% 

70.3% 

63.1% 

73.9% 

From  Table  1,  we  can  see  that  accuracies  from  SVM  and 
MART  learner  can  reach  as  high  as  74%.  This  daily  trend 
prediction  accuracy  is  higher  than  most  of  models  and  the 
values reported on financial analysis websites. 

 

Fig. 4.  Prediction accuracy by single feature 

From  the  figure,  we  can  see  that  DAX  yields  the  best 
results,  70.8%  accuracy  of  prediction.  Prediction  accuracies  of 
Australian  dollar,  FTSE  and  oil  price  are  also  relatively  high, 
reaching 67.2%, 66.4% and 65.2% respectively.  

In addition, we note that SVM algorithm is very sensitive to 
the  size  of  training  data.  When  the  size  of  training  set  is  not 
large  enough,  hyper-plane  found by  SVM  algorithm might  not 
be  able  to  split  the  data  properly.  Thus,  feature  selection  is 
essential  when  using  SVM.  In  contrast,  Multiple  Additive 
Regression Trees (MART) algorithm requires less training data 
and prefers high dimensional feature set. 

-50050020406000.20.40.60.811.2Relative delayTime window sizeNormalized correlationTo  test  the  generality  of  our  model,  we  used  the  same 
algorithm  to  predict  the  other  two  US  stock  markets.  The 
results are shown in Table 3 below. 

To  build  up  the  multiclass  classifier,  we  firstly  need  to 
define  the  width  of  the  central  region.  To  evaluate  how  well 
our  classifier  is,  we  introduced  the  concepts  of  precision  and 
recall, which are defined as 

TABLE III.  

PREDICTION ACCURACY ON ALL US STOCK MARKETS 

 

NASDAQ 

DJIA 

S&P 500 

Accuracy 

74.4% 

77.6% 

76% 

 

As can be seen, all entries  in the  table are high. This shows 
that our model can be applied to all US stock markets. Actually, 
the  idea  of  using  time  delay  between  different  stock  markets 
can be also utilized to predict other indexes. 

B.  Regression 

Compared  to  stock  trend,  the  exact  increment  in  stock 
index  may  provide  more  information  for  investment  strategy. 
This  means  the  classification  problem  now  evolves  to  a 
regression  problem.  To  judge  the  performance  of  our  model, 
we  use  square  root  of  mean  square  error  (RMSE)  as  criteria, 
which is defined as 

 

        
 

 
∑   ̃          
   

 
 
                         (6) 

We  use  linear  regression,  generalized  linear  model  (GLM) 
and  SVM  algorithm  to  predict  exact  value  of  daily  NASDAQ 
movement.  The  RMSE  values  for  different  algorithms  are 
reported in Table 4 below. 

TABLE IV.  

STOCK INDEX REGRESSION ACCURACY 

 

Baseline 

SVM  

Linear  

GLM  

RMSE 

40.4 

21.6 

24.8 

28.7 

 

The  baseline  predictor  in  the  table  is  formed  by  a  zero-
order  hold  filter.  From  the  table,  we  can  see  that  SVM  gives 
the most accurate prediction. The RMSE given by SVM is 21.6, 
only half of the average fluctuation, 47.66.  

C.  Multiclass Classification 

In  previous  part,  we  explored  various  methods  to  improve 
prediction  accuracy  and  minimize  square  root  mean  square 
error.  These  efforts  can  be  directly  used  to  maximize  the 
trading  profit.  However,  besides  maximizing  profit,  another 
aspect  of  our  task  is  to  minimize  trading  risk.  In  this  part,  we 
will  use  the  SVM  regression  model  and  start  from  the  basic 
intuition in SVM algorithm. 

In  SVM,  the  further  distance  between  the  point  and  hyper-
plane  is,  more  confident  we  are  for  the  prediction  we  made, 
whereas, our prediction cannot be very accurate when the point 
is  close  to  hyper-plane.  To  minimize  the  trading  risk,  we  can 
pick  out  these  risky  points  and  ignore  their  prediction  labels. 
Thus,  we  need  to  classify  the  original  data  into  at  least  three 
classes, negative, neutral  and positive. This  is  the  intuition  that 
leads to the prototype of our multiclass classification model. 

             

  

                              (7) 
     

          

  

                                    (8) 
     

In  the equations above,  tp,  fp and  fn stand  for  true positive, 
false  positive  and  false  negative  respectively.  The  precision 
and  recall  values  against  different  central  region  widths  are 
plotted  in Fig. 6.  In  the  figure, Recall  for positive class reflects 
the  proportion  of  predicted  rising  days  among  all  rising  days 
while  precision  indicates  the  hit  rate  among  rising  predictions. 
Thus,  recall  directly  impacts  the  frequency  of  trading  and 
precision  impacts  the  profit  /  loss  at  each  time.  Taking  the 
product of  the  two, we  calculate  the F1  score which  is defined 
as 

      

                

                

                              (9) 

 

Fig. 6.  Precision  and  recall  vs.  central  window  widths  for  positive  and 
negtive class 

The value of F1 scores for positive and negative classes are 
shown  in Fig. 7. As  can be  seen  from  the  graph, F1  scores  for 
both  class  are  relatively  high  around  0  and  50.  Therefore,  we 
shall choose window  size around 0 when  trading  fees  /  tax  are 
small  enough  to  be  ignored.  Otherwise,  we  should  choose  50 
as the optimal window size.  

Fig. 7.  F1 score vs. central window size for positive and negative class 

 

IV.  TRADING MODEL 

In  this  section,  we  will  build  up  a  trading  model  based  on 
the  predictor  we  find  in  section  2  and  section  3.  We  compare 
the  simulation  results  of  our  model  against  two  selected 
benchmarks. 

A.  Basic Settings 

We randomly select 5 different time slots for simulation, 50 
days  inside  each  time  slots. The  initial  capital  at  the  beginning 
of the each time slot is 10,000 dollars. At the end of the trading 
period,  all  possessed  stocks  are  forced 
to  be  cashed. 
Furthermore,  for  simplicity, we  suppose  that  there  is no Stamp 
Duty  or  any  kind  of  tax  or  fees  during  the  process  and  short 
sale is not allowed in our simulation. 

B.  Model Specification 

In  our  simulation,  we  use  two  benchmark  models  and  one 
model  using  our  predictor.  Here,  we  will  describe  the  three 
models in detail. 

1)  Benchmark model 1 
In  this  simple  model,  we  suppose  we  use  all  the  money  to 
buy stocks on  the  first day and sell  the  stocks at  the end. Thus, 
the profit  is depend on the  trend during  this testing period,  that 
is 

          

      
  

                                 (10) 

2)  Benchmark model 2 
In  this  model,  we  assume  that  closing  stock  index  of 
tomorrow  is  higher  than  today  if  today’s  index  is  higher  than 
that  of  yesterday. Whenever  the  prediction  is  rising, we  buy  at 
most   shares of stocks. Otherwise, we sell all stocks we have. 

fees  into consideration. We also assume  that our operation will 
not have direct effects on index value. 

TABLE V.  

TRADING RESULTS OF DIFFERENT TRADING STRATEGIES 

 

Benchmark 1  Benchmark 2  Our Model 

Period 1 

98.16 

-638.45 

1539.63 

Period 2 

1259.66 

1281.82 

685.27 

Period 3 

-1103.13 

-524.43 

Period 4 

654.58 

0.37 

921.81 

894.13 

Period 5 

-249.05 

-171.08 

32.18 

Average 

132.04 

-10.35 

814.60 

 

V.  CONCLUSION 

In  the  project,  we  proposed  the  use  of  data  collected  from 
different  global  financial  markets  with  machine  learning 
algorithms  to  predict  the  stock  index movements. Our  findings 
can be summarized into three aspects: 

1.  Correlation  analysis  indicates  strong  interconnection 
between  the  US  stock  index  and  global  markets  that 
close  right  before  or  at  the  very  beginning  of  US 
trading time.  

2.  Various machine  learning  based models  are  proposed 
for  predicting  daily  trend  of  US  stocks.  Numerical 
results suggests high accuracy 

This model performs well when stock markets go smoothly. 
But  it  losses  a  lot  when  the  markets  fluctuate  or  shocks 
frequently. 

3.  A  practical  trading  model  is  built  upon  our  well 
trained  predictor.  The  model  generates  higher  profit 
compared to selected benchmarks. 

3)  Proposed Trading Model 
We  use  the  prediction  results  from  our  SVM  learner.  The 
trading  principal  is  the  same  as  Benchmark  model  2.  That  is, 
we buy stock when prediction is positive and cash all stocks we 
have when prediction is negative. 

C.  Simulation Results 

The  profit  of  the  three  models  during  the  five  period  is 
shown in Table 5 below. From the table, we can see that during 
most of periods, our proposed model wins  the most profits. On 
average,  our  model  gains  814.6  dollars  as  profits  for  every  50 
days.  That  is  8%  return  rate  in  50  days.  Therefore,  we  can 
reach annual interests at about 30%. 

Besides  high  profit,  our  model  also  has  the  advantage  of 
low  risk.  Our  model  seldom  loses  in  trading  period  while 
benchmark  model  1  and  benchmark  model  2  loses  in  period  3 
and  5.  Actually,  in  most  cases,  our  model  can  get  at  least  5% 
profits in the 50 day long trading period. 

Although  we  can  reach  high  profit  and  low  risk  in  our 
simulation, we shall still remember that we did not take tax and 

  There are a number of further directions can be investigated 
starting  from  this  project.  The  first  one  is  to  explore  other 
creative  and  effective  methods  that  might  yield  even  better 
performance  on  stock  market  forecasting.  Second,  models  can 
be  modified  to  take  care  of  the  tax  and  fees  in  the  trading 
process.  Finally,  we  can  investigate  the  mechanism  of  short 
sale and maximize our profit even when the market is bullish. 

REFERENCE 

[1]  W.  Huang  et  al.,  “Forecasting  stock  market  movement  direction  wi th 
support  vector  machine,”  Computers  &  Operations  Research,  32,  pp. 
2513–2522005, 2005 

[2] 

J.  Moody,  et  al.,  “Learning  to  trade  via  direct  reinforcement,”  IEEE 
Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 12, no. 4, Jul. 2001.   

[3]  www.wikiposit.org 

[4]  S.  Zemke,  “On  developing  a  financial  prediction  system:  Pitfall  and 
possibilities,”  Proceedings  of  DMLL-2002  Workshop,  ICML,  Sydney, 
Australia, 2002. 

[5]  Vatsal  H.  Shah,  “Machine  learning  techniques  for  stock  prediction,” 
www.vatsals.com. 

 

 

