Identification of cancer-relevant Variations in a Novel Human Genome Sequence 
Robert Bruggner, Amir Ghazvinian1, & Lekan Wang1 
CS229 Final Report, Fall 2009 

1.  Introduction 
Cancer  affects  people  of  all  ages  worldwide  and  can  afflict  many  different  parts  of  the  body.    It  is  one  of  the 
leading causes of death in the world, accounting for 12% of all deaths and has a mortality rate of approximately one 
hundred  deaths  per  100,000  population.    An  individual’s  specific  configuration  of  DNA  (genotype)  influences 
susceptibility  to  cancer  by  modulating  the  effects  of  environmental  factors,  affecting  an  individual’s  behavior,  and 
also by altering normal biological functions of the body. Naturally, many extensive genome-wide association studies 
(GWAS)  of  variability  have  been  performed  that  attempt  to  associate  specific  genomic  variations  with  cancer. 
However,  due  to  technical  limitations,  those  studies  have  focused  on  the  evaluation  of  variations  that  occur 
commonly  within  a  population  while  ignoring  equally  potent  individual-specific  variations  (private  variations). 
More  specifically  the  dominant  technology  for measuring  single  nucleotide  polymorphisms  (SNPs)  in  the  genome, 
microarray SNP Chips, have  a  limited number  (between 200,000  and 1,000,000) of  static, pre-selected SNPs  that  it 
can detect in a genome. Thus, the size of SNP microarray chips limit us to the evaluation of a subset of the estimated 
2-3 million SNPs that occur in any individual’s genome. Furthermore, as the set of target SNPs that a chip is able to 
detect  is  fixed,  they  are  unable  to  detect  variations  unique  to  an  individual.  Many  experts  have  attributed  the 
marginal success of GWAS studies to the limited scope of variation analyzed with these chips [1].   
 Recent advances  in  sequencing  technologies,  specifically whole genome  sequencing, have enabled  the  study of 
disease  association  with  an  individual's  complete  genotype.    Using  an  individual’s  complete  genetic  sequence  to 
correlate  mutations  with  disease  risk  would  allow  us  to  find  rarer,  private  variations  that  affect  risk  and  likely 
contribute  much  more  to  susceptibility  than  previously  identified  common  variants.  Thus,  as  full-genome 
sequencing  becomes  cheaper  and  easier,  methods  for  variation  analysis  should  shift  their  focus  from  analysis  of 
common SNPs to and leverage the entirety of genomic variation. The method presented here takes such an approach 
and our aims are as follows: 
 
1) Use  supervised  learning  to  build  a model  of  cancer-relevant  SNPs  using  a  range  of  variation  topographical, 
chemical, and functional features. 
2) Evaluate method accuracy by validating model against known cancer-relevant SNPs. 
3) Identify cancer-relevant private SNPs in a newly sequenced genome using our model. 

2.  Materials and Methods 

2.1. Training Data 
As with any supervised learning problem, building a model of a cancer-relevant SNP and its validation requires 
substantial  training  data.  To  assemble  such  data,  we  extracted  5,902  cancer-associated  SNPs  from  two  manually 
curated variations databases, the Human Gene Mutation Database (HGMD) [2] and the Swiss-Var component of the 
UniProt knowledgebase  [3]. Both of  these  repositories are populated with variations extracted  from  literature where 
the  variant  has  been  show  to  be  statistically  correlated  with  disease.  As  such,  these  variations  were  considered  our 
gold  standard  for  both  training  and  validation  of  our model. All  variations  in  our  aggregated  training  data  encoded 
different  amino  acids  than  the  reference  base  (non-synonymous  SNPs)  and  we  were  therefore  limited  to  the 
classification of non-synonymous SNPs in our target genome.  
In  addition  to  our  positive  training  set,  we  extracted  29,185  neutral  polymorphisms  from  the  Swiss-Var 
database.  These  non-synonymous  mutations  had  not  been  associated  with  any  diseases  and  were  used  as  our 
negative training set.   
                                                 
1 These individuals are not in CS229 but worked on the project in conjunction with BMI212. 
1 

 
2 
2.2. Features 
For each SNP, we extracted a variety of features including cancer-relevant functional associations, involvement 
in known cancer pathways, and variation of amino acid physiochemical properties.  
SNP  functional  associations  are  binary  features  indicating  whether  a  SNP  is  present  in  transcripts  that  have  a 
functional  role  in  cancer-relevant  processes.  To  calculate  these  features,  we  mapped  each  SNP  to  corresponding 
coding  transcripts,  extracted  transcript  gene  ontology  (GO)  [4]  annotations  from  the  EnsEMBL  genome  database 
[5],  and  determined  if  the  associated  transcript  was  involved  in  any  of  the  following  biological  processes  or 
subprocesses:  “response  to  tumor”  (GO:0002347),  “apoptosis”  (GO:0006915),  “regulation  of  cell  cycle” 
(GO:0007049),  or  “DNA  repair”  (GO:0006281).  It  naturally  follows  that  the  successful  determination  of  these 
features relies heavily on the availability of correct, complete annotation of genes by GO terms. 
We  included  another  binary  feature  indicating  whether  each  SNP  is  present  in  a  gene  known  to  be  part  of  an 
established  cancer  pathway.   To  calculate  this  feature,  we  used  the  EnsEMBL  Perl  API  to  map  each  SNP  to 
corresponding  coding  transcripts  and  map  transcripts  to  genes.  We  then  cross-referenced  these  genes  against  all 
genes  in  all  known  cancer  pathways  from  the Kyoto Encyclopedia  of Genes  and Genomes  (KEGG)  [6]. The  utility 
of this feature is dependent on the availability of previously annotated and correct descriptions of cancer pathways.  
Finally,  for  each  SNP  we  calculated  basic  physiochemical  differences  between  the  encoded  wild  type  amino 
acid and variation-encoded amino acid. These  features  include change  in amino acid polarity, change  in amino acid 
hydrophobicity,  Grantham  Matrix  score  (a  score  quantifying  differences  between  any  two  amino  acids)  [7],  and 
transformation  of  an  amino-acid  encoding  codon  to  a  stop  codon.  These  features,  although  not  specific  to  cancer, 
were  included  because  they  are  easily  computable  for  all  amino  acids  and  are  not  dependent  on  prior  manually 
curated data. 

2.3. Model Building 

2.3.1. Feature Selection 
A  common  problem  when  building  a  classifier  is  the  use  of  correlated  features  that  make  the  model  overly 
sensitive to specific factors. To avoid this problem, we applied correlated feature selection (CFS) to our 9 features in 
order to discover any redundant information within our feature set. Next, we evaluated each feature independently to 
determine  their  respective  predictive  powers.  Finally,  although  issues  of  dimensionality  and  overfitting  can 
potentially occur when building models  from many  features, our  low  feature  set  to  training  set  size  ratio minimizes 
the risks of these effects.  

2.3.2. Classifier Selection 
Using  our  training  data,  calculated  features,  and  the  Weka  machine  learning  software  framework  [8],  we 
constructed  four models of a cancer-relevant SNP. We  first used Weka’s J48 decision  tree  learner with pruning and 
boosting.  Next,  we  trained  a  support  Vector  Machine  (SVM)  using  the  SMO  algorithm.  For  our  SVM,  we  used  a 
standard  linear  kernel  due  to  the  linear  nature  of  our  features.  Finally,  we  tested  two  types  of  Bayesian  classifiers: 
the simple to train naïve Bayes classifier and the more powerful Bayes net classifier. Of note, all our features besides 
the  Grantham  matrix  score  do  not  have  any  immediately  known  relationships  and  accordingly  the  Bayes  net 
classifier performed similarly to naïve Bayes classifier.   
For  each  of  these  classifiers,  we  trained  a  model  using  our  cancer-associated  SNP  training  set  described  in 
section 2.1, performed 10-fold  cross-validation on  each model,  and use ROC  curves  to  evaluate  the performance of 
each  model.  We  evaluated  each  model’s  performance  and  ultimately  chose  the  naïve  Bayes  classifier  to  identify 
cancer-relevant  SNPs  in  the  recently  sequenced  genome  of  a  male  of  European  decent,  hereafter  referred  to  as  P0 
[9]. 

 
 
 

3 

 
2.4. Application to P0 SNPs 
Having trained a model for cancer-relevant SNPs, we next sought to identify potentially deleterious private non- 
synonymous coding SNPs in the P0 genome. To establish our subset of SNPs for classification, we first started with 
the  set  of  all  2.7  million  P0  SNPs  as  provided  by  the  team  that  assembled  the  P0  genome.  In  order  to  remove 
population-common  variants,  we  leveraged  knowledge  of  common  patterns  of  human  genetic  variation  as 
established  by  the  International  HapMap  project.  We  removed  all  P0  SNPs  corresponding  to  SNPs  established  by 
the  International  HapMap  project  as  having  a  population  prevalence  greater  than  0.5%.  Removal  of  population 
common  variants  left  1.9  million  private  SNPs.  Next,  non-coding  SNPs  were  eliminated  by  mapping  all  private 
SNPs  to  the  NCBI  v36  human  reference  genome  using  the  EnsEMBL  core  Perl  API.  SNPs  that  failed  to  map  to 
coding  regions  of  transcripts  were  removed,  leaving  13,533  private  coding  SNPs.  Finally,  we  computed  variation 
effects  of  coding  private  SNPs  using  the  EnsEMBL  variation  API.  Synonymous  SNPs  were  removed,  leaving  us 
with  a  final  total  of  6,718  private  non-synonymous  coding  variations  for  classification. Post  extraction,  each  SNP 
was classified using our trained naïve Bayes classifier and cancer-relevance was assessed.  

3.  Results 

3.1. Feature Evaluation and Classifier Performance  

3.1.1. Feature Selection 
 Using CFS, we  found  no  correlations  among  our  features  and  thus  chose  to  use  all  of  them when  building  our 
model. Results of our evaluation of feature predictive power are shown in Table 1. This evaluation revealed that Cell 
Cycle,  Member  of  Cancer  Pathway,  and  DNA  repair  were  the  most  informative  of  our  features.  Other  functional 
properties,  such  as  tumor  response  and  apoptosis,  effectively  had  no  predictive  power  because  none  of  our  training 
SNPs were functionally mapped to these categories via GO annotations.  
 

Feature 
Stop Mutation 
Hydrophobicity Change 
Grantham Score 
Polarity Change 
Member of Cancer Pathway 
Apoptosis 
Cell Cycle 
Tumor Response 
DNA Repair 

Table 1. Results of classification using single features. 
Accuracy 
Specificity 
Sensitivity 
0.093 
1.0 
83.9483 
0.0 
1.0 
82.3105 
.095 
1.0 
83.9891 
82.3105 
1.0 
0.0 
.482 
.976 
88.8617 
0.0 
1.0 
82.3105 
.53 
.981 
90.1104 
82.3105 
1.0 
0.0 
.468 
.983 
89.1504 

AUC 
.5421 
.4998 
.5434 
.4998 
.7239 
.4998 
.7502 
.4998 
.7222 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3.1.2. Model Evaluation 
We performed 10-fold cross-validation on each one of our classifiers  in  training. The results are summarized  in 
Table 2. The two Bayes methods performed best in AUC and sensitivity, while the decision tree and SVM were both 
more  specific.  We  chose  to  use  naïve  Bayes  as  our  final  classifier,  as  it  had  the  highest  sensitivity  among  the 
classifiers we used, and the second highest AUC. The specificity was above 0.95 so we can be reasonably confident 
of  our  positive  predictions. We  determined  the  learning  curves  for  several  of  our  classifiers  as  a  final  test  for  bias 
and variance problems. Neither bias nor variance was significant issues for any of the classifiers. 
Finally, as a sanity check, we classified HGMD diabetes mutations with a naïve Bayes classifier  trained on our 
gold  standard  cancer  SNPs.  As  expected,  we  have  less  than  10%  sensitivity  for  predicting  diabetes  with  our 
classifier, which demonstrates its specificity to cancer.  

4 

 

 

 

Table 2. Results of classifier performance using 10-fold cross validation. 

 Type 
 J48 
 SVM  
 Naïve Bayes 
 Bayes Net  
 Naïve Bayes - Diabetes 

AUC 
.8026 
.7622 
.8286 
.8299 
.6424 

Accuracy  Specificity 
.90813 
.982 
.981 
.90346 
.963 
.90136 
.969 
.90496 
.98115 
.997 

Sensitivity 
.564 
.544 
.614 
.607 
.087 

Figure  2. A  and  B  show  ROC  curves  for  naive  Bayes,  Bayes  net  classifiers. C  shows  performance  of  naive  Bayes 
classifier on diabetes data 

3.2. Identifying Novel SNPs 
Using  our  naïve  Bayes  classifier,  we  predicted  with  confidence  greater  than  95%  that  210  private,  non-
synonymous  SNPs  in  the  P0  genome  have  potential  cancer  relevance.  Of  these  210  variations, 65%  changed  an 
amino acid-encoding codon  to a stop codon, 5% occurred within known cancer pathway genes, 4% occurred within 
genes  involved  in  cell  cycle  regulation,  and  2%  occurred  within  DNA  repair  genes.  Additionally,  of  the  1,794 
training  SNPs  extracted  from HGMD,  32 were  found  to  occur within  the  P0  genome,  10  of which we  successfully 
re-predicted. Factors contributing to low recall of our gold standard SNPs are examined in the discussion section. 

4.  Discussion 
Using our naïve Bayes classifier, we were only able to re-predict correctly 10 of the 32 SNPs that were included 
in both P0's genome and our gold standard for cancer-associated mutations; however, these results are actually quite 
promising given that our model has 96.3% specificity.  The high specificity of our model gives great confidence that 
any  mutation  our  classifier  predicts  as  being  cancer-associated  is  not  a  false  positive,  which  is  important  in  the 
context of  identifying candidates  for biological exploration.   Pursuing any of  these candidates  further would  require 
significant effort both in terms of time and funds, so ensuring the quality of these results is essential. 
Looking in further detail at putative cancer-relevant private SNPs, it is straightforward to hypothesize about the 
detrimental  effects  of  these  mutations  and  how  they  might  contribute  to  cancer  susceptibility.  A  mutation  on 
Chromosome  14  at  base  53,487,272  changes  an  encoded  amino  acid  from  valine  to  alanine  in  the  Bone 
Morphegenetic Protein 4 gene  (BMP4) protein product. This mutation occurs within a  transformation growth  factor 
domain  and  could potentially  alter  the protein's  ability  to  control  cell proliferation  and differentiation. Furthermore, 
other mutations in BMP4 have been shown to cause defects during eye, brain, and digit development [10]. 
Another mutation  on  chromosome  17  at  base  42,589,359  changes  a  leucine-encoding  codon  to  a  stop  codon  in 
the Cell Division Cycle Protein 27 (CDC27) gene product. This mutation reduces the encoded peptide to 254  amino 
acids  from  824  and  eliminates  the  presence  of  a  tetratrico  peptide  repeat  domain  at  the  C-terminus  of  the  peptide, 
thus  altering  the  protein  product  to  properly  bind  with  other  proteins  and  accordingly,  mediate  cell  division.  Such 
results give us confidence that variations identified as deleterious by our method are biologically relevant.  

 
5 
Through  analysis  of  our  selected  features  and  their  predictive  power  for  cancer  susceptibility,  we  found  that 
there appears to be a tradeoff between the information content of a feature and its ease of obtainment.  We can make 
the  best  predictions  when  we  know  whether  or  not  the  mutation  was  part  of  a  transcript  involved  in  cell  cycle 
regulation or DNA repair or was a member of a known cancer pathway because  those  three features had  the highest 
accuracy and sensitivity when  they were used  individually  to predict cancer  risk.   We attribute  the high  information 
content of these features to the central nature of these processes to all cancers. Unfortunately, because these features 
are dependent on human annotation, they were inconsistent in availability due to incomplete genomic annotation.   
Surprisingly, some of the features that we hoped would be informative did not contribute to the accuracy of our 
classifier.   Those  features  which  have  an  AUC  <=  0.5  when  evaluated  individually  essentially  provide  the  same 
amount of information as random chance, so mutations involved in tumor response and apoptosis were not any more 
likely to be predicted as cancer-associated than mutations without these functional properties. On closer examination 
however, we found that this lack of predictive power occurs because there are almost no SNPs associated with either 
of  these  two  properties  in  our  training  data  sets;  only  one  of  our  training  cancer  SNPs  is  associated with  apoptosis 
and none of our training cancer SNPs were associated with tumor response.  We do not know for sure whether these 
features  could  improve  our  results  given  more  complete  gene  annotation,  but  based  on  results  for  our  other 
functionally defined features, we believe that they are still promising candidates for prediction. 

5.  Conclusions and Future Work 
Despite  inherent  data  biases,  our  method  successfully  leverages  the  entire  genome  in  order  to  provide 
personalized,  highly  specific  analysis  of  an  individual’s  private  mutations.  Our  method  allowed  us  to  identify  210 
putative  cancer-relevant  SNPs  in  the  P0  genome  that  are  similar  to  our  training  set  in  terms  of  the  defined  feature 
set. These high confidence predictions serve as an excellent starting point for further biological exploration.  
Functional  associations  and other  cancer-specific  features had  among  the highest  information  content, but  their 
predictive powers were hampered by  incomplete annotations. Future  iterations of our method will could avoid  such 
biases of manual curation by incorporating more complex yet universally computable features such as SNP presence 
within conserved structural domains.  
 Finally, given the 210 putative cancer-relevant SNPs, there is currently no way for us to quantify risk conferred 
by each variation given our available  training data. To enable such analyses  in  the future, models of cancer-relevant 
SNPs should be partially derived from variations present in the genomes of well-documented cancer patients. Given 
the  technology  used  to  sequence  the  genome  of  P0,  such  data  should  be  available within  a  few  years. Much  in  the 
same way  that  full  genome  sequencing  has  enabled more  specific,  personal  analyses  of  variation  versus  disease,  so 
too  will  it  enable  better  models  of  deleterious  variation  through  the  availability  of  full  genomic  sequences  of 
diseased patients. 

References 

1. Goldstein DB. Common genetic variation and human traits. N Engl J Med 2009; 360:1696-8. 
2. Stenson PD, et al. The Human Gene Mutation Database: 2008 update. Genome Med 1(1):13, 2009 
3. Yip, Y.L, et al. Retrieving mutation-specific information for human proteins in uniprot/swiss-prot knowledgebase. 
Journal of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, 2007, 5(6): 1215-1231. 
4. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Gene ontology: tool for the unification of biology. Nat. Genet.. May 2000; 
5. T. J. P. Hubbard, et al. Ensembl 2009. Nucleic Acids Research 2009 37 Database issue:D690-D697 
6. Kanehisa, M. et al. KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 27-30 
7. Grantham R. Amino acid difference formula to help explain protein evolution. Science 1974;185:862–4 
8. Mark Hall, et al. The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update; SIGKDD Explorations, Volume 11, Issue 1. 
9. Dmitry  Pushkarev  et  al.  Single-molecule  sequencing  of  an  individual  human  genome.  Nature  Biotechnology  27, 
847 - 850 (2009) 
10.  Bakrania  et  al.  Mutations  in  BMP4  cause  eye,  brain,  and  digit  developmental  anomalies:  overlap  between  the 
BMP4 and hedgehog signaling pathways. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Feb;82(2):304-19 

