Portfolio Optimization under Time-Varying
Economic Regimes

Cory Turner
ICME
Stanford University
cgturner@stanford.edu

Jiho Han
MS&E
Stanford University
jihohan@stanford.edu

I . IN TRODUC T ION
Our paper aims to answer the question: Can the macroe-
conomic condition be used to better allocate investments
among different sectors of a market? Motivated by classical
Markowitz portfolio theory, and prior work in attempting to
incorporate exogenous economic factors in portfolio optimiza-
tion [1][2][3][4], we explore three approaches to dynamically
rebalance a portfolio as market or economic regimes change
continuously over time. Traditionally, portfolio theory assumes
that a set of assets can be characterized by a mean return and a
covariance matrix, which are stationary over time. Empirically,
it has been found [5] that this stationary assumption does not
hold; indeed, the behavior of a group of assets is materially
dependent on many observable and unobservable economic
factors which change over time.

A. Background: Markowitz Portfolio Theory
Given a vector of returns for k sectors r = (r1 , ...rk ) with
ri = (rit 1 , ...rit n ), deﬁne the mean µ and covariance matrix
Σ as

µ = (µ1 , ...µk )

Σ = Cov(ri , rj )1≤i≤j≤k

Markowitz portfolio theory states that the efﬁcient portfolio
which gives the maximum risk-adjusted return for a given level
of risk-aversion factor γ is the following:
w = argmaxwwT µr − γwT Σw
subject to wT 1 = 1

In general, this quadratic optimization cannot be solved in
closed form, and requires the use of a quadratic programmer.
We used the cvx toolbox for MATLAB, and quadprog in R.
The main goal of our work is to ﬁnd plug-in estimates for the
mean vector µ and covariance matrix Σ which vary over time.

B. Outline
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we describe the macroeconomic and sector return data
being examined and demonstrate how Principle Components
Analysis can reduce the dimension of the economic space. In

Section III, we explore two economic proximity-based weight-
ing scheme for estimating better mean vector and covariance
matrix. The ﬁrst approach identiﬁes in discrete economic
”regimes” using k-means; we extended this idea to continuous
space using a Gaussian kernel in the second approach. In
Section IV, we depart from the Markowitz framework and
reformulate portfolio construction as a reinforcement learning
problem. Using ﬁtted Q-iteration, we look for the optimal
policy given a economic state. In Section V, we evaluate
the performance of different strategies and compare to the
benchmarks. Finally, Section VI concludes the paper.

I I . DATA COL LEC T ION AND PCA
A. Sector Indices
Since there are not enough sector/industry indices with long
history (+10 years), we decide to construct a set of indices
ourselves. Using Russell 1000 as an underlying universe,
we group the index constituents by 2-digit Global Industry
Classiﬁcation Standard (GICS) for the period from January
1980 to March 2009. Then, we form 24 equal-weighted
sector portfolios at the beginning of each month and calculate
returns assuming 1-month holding period. Dividends are
assumed to be reinvested to the stock on the ex-dividend date.
The description of the sectors is shown in Appendix A.

In constructing the indices, we ensure that there is enough
number of stocks in each sector so that index returns are not
driven by a few stocks. Since Russell 1000 is a well-known
large-cap index, we expect each constituent to have sufﬁcient
liquidity and low transaction cost for trade. In other words,
we believe that these sector index returns can be replicated at
reasonable cost in real practice.

B. Economic Data
The primary source of economic data is Federal Reserve
Bank of St. Louis. The Fed collects numerous economic data
from several sources and allows users to download them
as text ﬁles. We gather a set of 27 economic indicators we
believe has signiﬁcant impact on certain sectors as well as on
general economy. The list of macroeconomic information is
shown in Appendix B.

In order to minimize look-ahead bias when trading, we lag
these economic data by 1-2 months as appropriate. For exam-
ple, we assume the GDP ﬁgure for 2009Q1 (which ended in
March) became available for trading on May. Unfortunately,
there is no easy solution for look-ahead bias due to revisions.
As far as we know, there is no comprehensive point-in-time
database that tracks the changes in macroeconomic indices.

C. Economic Dimension Reduction Using PCA
The economic time-series collected can all be thought of as
proxies for the economic condition at time t, and although
each is a different measure, it is reasonable to assume that
they can be largely described using a lower dimensional
space. To reduce complexity of optimizations in subsequent
sections of this paper, and to gain an intuitive understanding
of the underlying economic state space, we perform Principle
Components Analysis (PCA) on the standardized indicator
series to reduce the dimensionality.

Since our economic time-series data is of varying lengths,
at each point in time for which we compute an economic
decomposition, in order to use complete series’, we select
only a subset of our 27 economic indicators. This is achieved
heuristically by optimizing the tradeoff being number of
economic indicators, and length of the available series, by
maximizing the product of these two quantities.

Having selected the economic indicators, we perform PCA,
and choose the number of PCs that explain at least 80% of
the variance in the economic condition as our model selection
criteria. Using this decomposition, we can represent an
economic state at time t as the projection of the observation
at time t onto the ﬁrst n PCs, we denote this state vector as st .

Recall
is describe the expected relationship
that our goal
between a group of sectors conditioned on the current
economic condition. Towards this end, we would like for
our economic decomposition in the reduced space to cluster
when according to when economic condition is ’similar’
in some sense. If we can get this, then we can reasonably
the mean µt and covariance Σt generated by
expect
that
weighting observations at time s < t by the distance between
the economic condition at time t to that at time s.

to make sense of
Towards this, we attempt
the PCA
decomposition to determine if
the results make sense
fundamentally. Looking at the biplot relationship between the
ﬁrst two PCs in Figure 1, we ﬁnd that the ﬁrst PC, clearly
indicates a clustering of projections of economic indicators
in a sensible way. In the right half of the plot, the vectors are
generally negative economic indicators (unrate, credit), while
on the left half, the vectors are generally positive indicators
(gdp, payrolls). The second PC seems to be related to an
inﬂation metric, with high inﬂation represented on the bottom
half, and low inﬂation on the top.

Fig. 1. Biplot relationship of 1st and 2nd PC

Fig. 2. Projection of Economic State onto First Two PC’s

Figure 2 plots the projection of the economic state onto
the ﬁrst two principle components since the 1960’s. Notice
that the PC clearly identiﬁes serious recessionary periods in
history, from the Oil Shocks of the 1970’s, to the Credit Crisis
of 2008-2009. This validates that our economic decomposition
is stable and is capable of identifying economic regimes. We
now proceed to condition our portfolio optimization decisions
on this information.

I I I . ECONOM IC PROX IM I TY BA SED W E IGH T ING
A. Discrete states: k-means clustering
In our ﬁrst approach, motivated by prior work, we attempt
to identify discrete economic regimes - e.g., Good vs. Bad
economy in 2-state regime - within which we may expect the
mean vector µt and covariance matrix Σt to be stationary.
To do this, apply k-means clustering algorithm over all

−0.10−0.050.000.050.10−0.10−0.050.000.050.10Comp.1Comp.2Comp.1Comp.2creditlindpro12dpayems1dlipmat12dlipcongd12doilpricelgdpc3dunratenapmlipbuseq12dunrate3dlgdpc12dgs10cpifesl12dlpce_lgdpc1lpce3d−20−100102030−20−1001020−402468pc1−402468−4−2024pc219701980199020002010−4−2024(cid:118)(cid:144)(cid:147)(cid:71)(cid:154)(cid:143)(cid:150)(cid:138)(cid:146)(cid:154)(cid:122)(cid:136)(cid:157)(cid:144)(cid:149)(cid:142)(cid:154)(cid:71)(cid:77)(cid:71)(cid:115)(cid:150)(cid:136)(cid:149)(cid:154)(cid:107)(cid:150)(cid:155)(cid:71)(cid:106)(cid:150)(cid:148)(cid:106)(cid:153)(cid:140)(cid:139)(cid:144)(cid:155)(cid:71)(cid:106)(cid:153)(cid:144)(cid:154)(cid:144)(cid:154)observations in the training window of m-months to cluster
the economic condition in PCA space (P C1 , P C2 , ..., P Cn )
around k-centroids.

Next, we project the current economic state into PCA space
to obtain st , and attempt to determine if the current number
of clusters is sufﬁcient. We do this by testing the hypothesis
that the current economic state is a new cluster, which is
evaluated by comparing the silhouette statistic between the
two models. If a new cluster is required, we create one,
otherwise, we assign the current economic state to an existing
cluster.

Finally, we compute the sample mean and covariance all
observations that fall into the same cluster as the current
economic state st , and use the resulting mean vector µt and
covariance matrix Σt
in our convex optimization problem
from Section 1. Please see the Evaluation section for results
and discussion.

One observation made during this exploration was that
it
appears to take an arbitrarily large number of clusters to
describe the n-dimensional PCA economic state space, as
new observations frequently generated new clusters, which
is causing us to lose a lot of training data. This motivates
the idea of using all observations, but weighting them in
continuous space.

B. Continuous State: Gaussian Kernel
A natural extension of the discrete regime idea in the previous
section is, assuming that there are arbitarily many states in the
economy, come up with a way to generate conditional mean
vector µt and covariance matrix Σt using weighted sample
statistics of all observations training window, weighted by
some measure of how similar the current state st is to each
of the previous si .

This is achieved by weighting each observation by a Gaussian
kernel, such that wi = exp(−(si − st )T τ (si − st )), where
τ is a diagonal bandwidth matrix that tunes how quickly
the weights decay. The value of τ was tuned by empirically
maximizing the tradeoff between assigning near-zero weight to
too many observations, and not clearly discriminating between
economically dissimilar states. Figure 3 plots a sample of the
weights for 1980 to 1991. Notice that this was a recessionary
period, and higher weights are given to prior periods under
which the market was in distress.
Next, since we want our portfolio to be fully invested, we
to sum to 1, and generate the
normalize the weights wi
t(cid:88)
conditional mean vector µt and covariance matrix Σt as
i=t−m

(riwi )

µt =

1
m

Σt = Cov(ri,sws , rj,sws )t−m≤s≤t,1≤i≤j≤k

Fig. 3. Gaussian Kernel Weights wi at t=1991

As before, we use estimates as plug-in estimates for the
convex optimization problem posted at the start. Please see
the Evaluation section for results and discussion.

IV. R E IN FORC ED L EARN ING : F ITT ED Q - IT ERAT ION
While the previous approaches have appealing economic
logic and supportive result, they are still based on and, in
a sense, conﬁned by Markowitz framework. Departing from
this classical
theory, we reformulate portfolio construction
decision as a reinforced learning problem whose objective is
to ﬁnd the optimal sector weighting policy given the current
economic state. In doing so,
the immediate difﬁculty we
face is that both our state and action spaces are continuous,
high-dimensional spaces; although reduced in dimension
through PCA, economic state S still requires 3 5 dimensions
whereas action space A lies in 24 dimensional constrained
space. To solve this issue, we resort to a variant of ﬁtted
Q-iteration (FQI) called advantaged-weighted regression
(FQI-AWR). [6]

A. FQI using Advantage-Weighted Regression
FQI is an iterative algorithm to approximate the state-action
value function Q : S×A→R using historical state-action pairs
(s, a). The estimated Q-functions are searched over the action
space A to ﬁnd the optimal value function V(s). The updated
value functions are subsequently used for ﬁnding better ap-
proximation of Q and the process repeats. However, during the
value update, the greedy operation V(s) = maxaQ(s, a) often
becomes prohibitively expensive for the continuous action
space. FQI-AWR handles this situation by replacing the costly
max operator with the weighted regession estimate ˆV(s)
whose weights are derived by advantage A = Q(s, a) − V(s).
More speciﬁcally, AWR algorithm performs updates according
to the following equations:
Q-function update

Qk+1 (s, a) = sA (SA

T W SA )−1SA

T W Qk

V-function update
Vk+1 (s) = s(S T U S )−1S T U Qk+1

0.00.20.40.60.81980198219841986198819900.00.20.40.60.8Policy update (after Vk converges)
µ(s) = s(S T U S )−1S T U A

Markowitz optimization, we impose two constraints: (1) the
weights add up to 1 and (2) the maximum bet of ±5% from
the equal-weighted portfolio. The backtest result for these
ﬁve portfolios is shown in Figure 4 and in Table I.

where sA = [sT , aT ]T , SA = [sA(1) , sA(2) , ..., sA(T) ] is the
state-action matrix with the associated diagonal weight matrix
Wii = ws (si )wa (ai ). S = [sT
T ] is the state-only
2 , ..., sT
1 , sT
matrix whose weight is given by Uii = w(s)u(s, a) where u
is the normalized advantage. A = [aT
T ] represents
1 , aT
2 , ..., aT
the action matrix. [6] Notice that, we need a distance metric
for the action space in order to compute W . As in the
economic state case, we use Gaussian kernel.

The AWR procedures described above have two very intuitive
features that differentiate itself from the previous approaches.
First,
it measures the similarity based on both state and
action. This enables us to appropriately evaluate the cases
where economic situations are similar, but the actions taken
are quite different. Secondly, the value updating step based on
normalized advantage inherently awards the good actions (i.e.,
making positive returns) while penalizing the bad actions.
For instance, suppose we have an observation in history that
is economically similar to the current state, but the action
taken at that time resulted in a very negative return. The
natural response is not to repeat the same mistake and AWR
updating policy exactly perform this task.

B. Implementation issues
FQI-AWR framework is straightforward and, for the most
part, directly applicable to our setting. However, there are a
few places where we make implicit assumptions or deviate
from the standard model as we see necessary. We clarify
these points here. First, we set our initial policy as the
benchmark Markowitz weights plus a random turbulence term.
The random turbulence is taken from a normal distribution
N (0, 0.052 ). Adding turbulence allows to look at the paths
different from Markowitz portfolios. Second, our reward func-
tion is solely the return generated from the action chosen. We
do not consider the risk implied by Markowitz model. Third,
during the ﬁnal step of applying the optimal policy to the
current state, we rescale the weight vector s(S T U S )( −1)S T U
so that
it sums up to 1. While it
is unconventional, we
need this additional step to ensure fully invested portfolios.
Conceptually, this is equivalent to adjust the bandwidth of
locally weighted regression.

V. EVALUAT ION
We evaluate the efﬁcacy of our economic similarity-based
methods against two benchmark portfolios: The ﬁrst is the
equal-weighted index, which is equivalent to invest the same
proportion of money to each stock in the universe. The second
benchmark is the portfolio formed by Markowitz optimization
with no economic prior. We simply take the past 60-months
of return and calculate mean and covariance matrix with
equal weights. Moreover, for any portfolio that goes through

Fig. 4. Backtest Result from Jan 1985 to Mar 2009

Equal Markowitz k-means Gaussian Fitted-Q
11.8% 12.5% 13.3%
Ann. Return 10.2% 11.4%
0.59
Info. Ratio
0.56
0.63
0.70
0.66
TABLE I
BACK T E S T PER FORMANC E R E TURN S AND IN FORMAT ION RAT IO S

All of our three methods outperformed the benchmarks both
in term of annualized return. We repeat backtests with varying
combination of parameters, such as maximum bet, bandwidth
for Gaussian kernel, etc. Although the result of FQI portfolio
may vary stochastically due to the turbulence term, the overall
performance of economic similarity-based methods is clearly
better than the benchmarks.

V I . CONC LU S ION
Our research is based on the presumption that sectors behaves
in similar ways under similar economic conditions. To test
our hypothesis, we ﬁrst apply PCA to a set of macroeconomic
variables to reduce the dimension of economic states. The
resulting principle components successfully captures the
major economic trends as well as other aspects of economy,
e.g., inﬂation concern or credit-tightening.

We compare three methods of
incorporating economic
similarities into portfolio construction: (1) k-means clustering,
(2) Gaussian kernel distance, and (3) ﬁtted Q-iteration (FQI).
While all of the three methods outperformed the benchmarks,
the ﬁrst two are a modiﬁcation of classical Markowitz model.
In the calculation of expected return and covariance matrix,
in a departure form the assumption that these quantities are
stationary, we compute weighted sample statistics, giving
more weight
to the observations which correspond to a
similar economic state. The third approach poses the question

0123419851990199520002005201001234fitted−QGaussiank−meanMarkowitzequalB. Appendix B - Economic Indicators

Name
umcsent
umcsent3d
lgdpc12d
lgdpc3d
tdsp
tdsp3d
lpce3d
lpce logdpc1
unrate
unrate3d
payems1d
credit
term
dfedtar
gs10
oilprice
cpifesl12d
dgorder12d
dgorder3d
napm
tcu
lindpro12d
lipmat12d
liputil12d
lipmine12d
lipbuseq12d
lipcongd12d

Description
University of Michigan: Consumer Sentiment
3-month Change of umcsent
12-month Change in log of GDP
3-month Change in log of GDP
Household Debt Service Payments
3-month Change of tdsp
3-month Change in Log of Personal Cons. Exp.
log(pce) - log(gdpc1)
Civilian Unemployment Rate
3-month Change of Unemployment Rate
1-month Change of Nonfarm Payrolls
Credit Spread (Baa - Aaa)
30-Year Treasury- 10-Year Treasury CM Rate
Federal Funds Target Rate
10-Year Treasury Constant Maturity Rate
Oil Price - West Texas Intermediate
CPI All Items Ex Food & Energy - 12-month Change
Durable Goods Order - 12-month Change
Durable Goods Order - 3-month Change
ISM Manufacturing: PMI Composite Index
Capacity Utilization: Total Industry
Industrial Production Index
Industrial Production: Materials
Industrial Production: Electric and Gas Utilities
Industrial Production: Mining
Industrial Production: Business Equipment
Industrial Production: Consumer Goods
TABLE III
ECONOM IC IND ICATOR S - SOURC E : S T. LOU I S F ED

into a reinforced learning framework, directly searching for
the optimal policy using simulated strategy-return pairs. To
cope with high dimensional, continuous state-action space,
we adopt advantage-weighted regression technique that
expresses the optimal policy as a weighted-sum of previous
actions. Since we only reward return and do not penalize risk
(covariance), the resulting policy gives the highest return but
the information ratio less than the second method.

Given the signiﬁcant improvement in our result, we believe
that, to a certain degree, history does repeat and portfolio
optimization can beneﬁt from not only taking economic simi-
larities into consideration but also evaluating the effectiveness
of the actions taken under those circumstances.

V I I . R E FERENCE S

[1] N. Chen, R. Roll, and S. Ross, “Economic forces and the stock market,”
Journal of Business, vol. 59, 1986.
[2] J. Stangl, B. Jacobsen, and N. Visaltanachoti, “Sector rotation over
business-cycles,” Mar. 2008.
[3] R. Madrid, K. McNeil, J. Miller, E. Slover, and B. Zimmerman, “Eco-
nomic forces and stock sectors,” Dec. 2008.
[4] J. Shanken and M. I. Weinstein, “Economic forces and the stock market
revisited,” Journal of Empirical Finance, Sep. 2005.
[5] T. L. Lai and H. Xing, Statistical Models and Methods for Financial
Markets. New York, NY: Springer, 2008.
[6] G. Neumann and J. Peters, “Fitted q-iteration by advantage weighted
regression,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 22
(NIPS 2008), 2009.

V I I I . A P PEND IC E S

A. Appendix A - Underlying Sectors

GICS4 Code
1010
1510
2010
2020
2030
2510
2520
2530
2540
2550
3010
3020
3030
3510
3520
4010
4020
4030
4040
4510
4520
4530
5010
5510

Description
Energy
Materials
Capital Goods
Commercial Services & Supplies
Transportation
Automobiles & Components
Consumer Durables & Apparel
Hotels, Restaurants & Leisure
Media
Retailing
Food & Staples Retailing
Food, Beverage & Tobacco
Household & Personal Products
Health Care Equipment & Services
Pharmaceuticals & Biotechnology
Banks
Diversiﬁed Financials
Insurance
Real Estate
Software & Services
Technology Hardware & Equipment
Semiconductors & Semiconductor Equipment
Telecommunication Services
Utilities
TABLE II
UND ER LY ING SECTOR S - SOURC E : R EU TER S

