Mapping geometry in heart rate data

Gunnar Carlsson, Jeﬀrey Danciger, Jason Morton

December 12, 2009

Abstract

We introduce a new methodology for the analysis of
heart interbeat interval time series based on the ge-
ometric/topological analysis of spaces of frequently
occurring motifs (short patterns in the data). We
use these methods to identify interesting diﬀerential
features in data from three patient groups: healthy,
congestive heart failure, and atrial ﬁbrillation.

1 Introduction

Much eﬀort has been dedicated to better under-
standing physiologic time series. One common
thread in some recent work is the notion that
the complexity of the time series yields informa-
tion about the health of the patient. Costa et.
al [2] have developed a complexity measure called
multi-scale entropy (MSE) and have successfully
applied it to diﬀerentiate between patients with
three diﬀerent heart conditions. The fruitful re-
sults of this and other complexity measures sug-
gest that there is a great deal of information
about the patient contained in a heart interbeat
interval time series, perhaps even more so than
is thought by the present day medical commu-
nity. In this article we introduce a new method-
ology for examining interbeat interval time se-
ries that diﬀerentiates disease status by identi-
fying speciﬁc structural features. The concrete
features identiﬁed in this article, and with fu-
ture applications of this method, could provide a
useful complement to complexity based features
(such as MSE). In particular, we claim that our
methodology produces features that may be eas-
ier to interpret from a physiologic point of view
and therefore could eventually lead to a better
understanding of the underlying physiologic sys-

tems.
Our methodology is built around two pro-
cesses. The ﬁrst is the detection of motifs, i.e.
recurring patterns of heart rate variation, over
multiple time scales that are diﬀerentially ex-
pressed in patients with diﬀering disease sta-
tus. The second is the topological analysis of
the space of frequently occurring motifs. Our
novel method exploits the geometry of the data
to produce useful visualizations rather than mea-
surements of mysterious statistics. We note that
on the one hand our method produces visualiza-
tions that require interpretation, but that on the
other hand our method is quite general and can
be applied to any time series. As the experi-
ments described here are the ﬁrst applications of
this method, we are not yet able to speculate on
the range of data for which the method will be
eﬀective.

2 Mapping motifs in interbeat
interval sequences

We examined heart interbeat interval sequences
collected over 24-hour periods from 72 healthy
(HL) patients, 43 patients with congestive heart
failure (CHF), and 9 patients with atrial ﬁbrilla-
tion (AF). About 3500 N -tuples were selected at
random from each time series for varying values
of N from 5 to 35. From each such collection, the
high variance high density (HVHD) motifs were
selected and normalized as follows. The density
at each tuple was calculated using a gaussian
kernel. The 40% highest variance tuples were
selected. From these tuples, the 40% highest
density tuples were selected. The remaining tu-
ples were then normalized to have zero mean and

1

variance equal to one (as we seek features inde-
pendent of the usual statistical measures). The
resulting collection represents the most densely
occurring high variance motifs of length N in the
time series as a subset of an N − 2 dimensional
sphere centered at the origin in RN . It is use-
ful to imagine that this discrete set of motifs is
sampled from a continuous motif space.

(a) AF

(b) CHF

(a) data set

(b) ﬁlter and clus-
ter

(c) Mapper
output

(c) HL

Figure 1: Schematic of the Mapper algorithm [1].
The data (a) is ﬁltered into overlapping subsets us-
ing the height function as ﬁlter. Each subset is par-
titioned into clusters, shown in (b). Mapper outputs
a graph (c) capturing geometric features of the data.

We used Mapper [1] to explore the geometry
of the high variance high density (HVHD) mo-
tifs. Mapper is a tool that produces schematic
graphs of point cloud data, as in the example de-
picted in Figure 1. Mapper ﬁlters the data into
overlapping subsets according to a user deﬁned
ﬁlter function and then partitions each subset
into clusters. Mapper then constructs a graph
representing each cluster as a node and connect-
ing two nodes with an edge if the clusters over-
lap. We used a gaussian kernel density function
as the ﬁlter in Mapper to produce graph outputs
for varying values of N . A sample of the results is
shown in Figure 2. These graphs immediately re-
veal a topological diﬀerence between the HVHD
motifs of the healthy patient versus those of the
other two patients. The motifs from the healthy
patient separate into two connected components,
while the motifs from both the CHF and AF pa-
tient form one large connected component.
In the Mapper analysis of an HL patient, one
connected component contains motifs exhibit-
ing a increasing trend (corresponding to decreas-
ing heart rate) while the other component con-
tains motifs exhibiting a decreasing trend (cor-
responding to increasing heart rate). This phe-

Figure 2: Results from Mapper with density as ﬁl-
ter on the motifs of length N = 6 from (a) an atrial
ﬁbrillation patient, (b) a congestive heart failure pa-
tient, (c) a healthy patient. Note that (c) has two
connected components while (a) and (b) have only
one.

nomenon is illustrated by running Mapper with
slope as the ﬁlter function (see Figure 3).

2.1 Quadratic Fit Plots

In order to visualize the distribution of mo-
tif shapes, we ﬁt each N -tuple to a quadratic
an2 + bn + c and plot the resulting ﬁt param-
eters b vs. a with color indicating of quality of
ﬁt. Roughly, the y -coordinate describes the slope
of the motif and the x-coordinate describes the
concavity. A simple calculation shows that all
points of such a quadratic ﬁt plot must lie in-
side a bounding el lipse, which is given by the ﬁt
parameters of normalized N -tuples that are ﬁt
perfectly by a quadratic.
Quadratic ﬁt plots for varying motif length N
were created for each patient. Although the re-
sults vary substantially from patient to patient
(see section 3), typical results are shown in Fig-
ure 4. These plots demonstrate the varying dis-
tribution of motif shapes as we increase the size
N of motifs considered. The plots demonstrate
very diﬀerent behavior across patient classes.
For small N , the HL motifs separate into two

2

13162228151216(a) AF N=6

(b) CHF N=6

(c) HL N=6

(d) AF N=11

(e) CHF N=11

(f ) HL N=11

Figure 3: Output from mapper with slope as the
ﬁlter function on the motifs of length N = 6 from
an HL patient. Each node depicts the collection of
motifs it represents.

groups (increasing and decreasing), while CHF
motifs exhibit no such separation. However,
as N increases the CHF motif space gradually
develops separation between increasing and de-
creasing motifs similar to that seen for the HL
patient for small N . Quadratic ﬁt plots of the
AF patient motif spaces appear similar to those
of Gaussian noise.

2.2 Non-quadratic Motifs

The quadratic ﬁt plots described in Section 2.1
reveal a lot about the motif space of an interbeat
interval time series. In particular, points falling
near the bounding ellipse in these plots are ﬁt
very well by a quadratic and the location of such
points on the plot therefore accurately describes
the shape of the corresponding motif. However,
points close to the center of the ellipse have high
ﬁt error meaning that quadratic functions fail to
fully describe the shape of these motifs. As can
be seen in the quadratic ﬁt plots from Figure 4,
both CHF and AF patients exhibit many of these
non-quadratic motifs. We used Mapper to inves-
tigate the space of such motifs. Figure 5 displays
Mapper outputs from an AF patient and a CHF
patient. Note the appearance of a cycle in the
CHF patient’s Mapper output. This indicates
the presence of a nontrivial circle in this patient’s
non-quadratic motif space. Further analysis re-
veals that the CHF patient’s non-quadratic motif

(g) AF N=16

(h) CHF N=16

(i) HL N=16

Figure 4: Plots of slope vs. concavity obtained from
quadratic ﬁts, for motif lengths N = 6, 11, 16. Color
represents relative error of ﬁt. The bounding ellipse,
consisting of the motifs ﬁt perfectly by a quadratic,
is depicted in black. For small N , the HL motifs sep-
arate into two components (increasing and decreas-
ing), while CHF motifs exhibit no such separation.
As N increases the CHF motif space gradually de-
velops separation between increasing and decreasing
motifs. Quadratic ﬁt plots of the AF patient motif
spaces appear similar to that of Gaussian noise.

space is made up of oscillatory patterns having
similar frequency but having varying phase. On
the other hand, the AF patient’s non-quadratic
motif space seems to lack interesting topological
structure.

3 Predicting Disease Status

The quadratic ﬁt plots described in Section 2.1
and Figure 4 depict compelling visual diﬀerences
between the three patient types. We converted
some information from these plots into numerical
features as follows. For each of the motif lengths
N = 5, 7, 10, 12, 18, 25, 35 we calculated the to-
tal error of quadratic ﬁt over all of a patient’s
HVHD motifs. We refer to these 7 features as
quadratic ﬁt error (QFE). We also calculated the
multi-scale entropy (MSE), as described in [2], at
4 time scales, as well as the mean and variance

3

Features Used
QFE
MSE
MV
QFE, MSE
QFE, MV
MSE, MV
QFE, MSE, MV

Success Rate Std Error#
0.3%
81.4%
0.3%
81.3
0.2%
90.1%
84.6
0.3%
0.2%
91.1%
0.2%
91.1%
92.1%
0.2%

Table 1: Linear classiﬁers of CHF vs HL were
built using various combinations of three feature
sets: Quadratic ﬁt error (QFE), multi-scale entropy
(MSE), and mean and variance (MV). The results of
a cross validation test are shown here.

tion of AF vs HL or AF vs CHF. We do note,
however, that a SVM built with only our QFE
features distinguished AF from HL with success
rate 99% in a leave one out cross validation test.
A similar success rate was achieved using only
the mean and variance features.

References

[1] G. Singh, F. Memoli and G. Carlsson. Topo-
logical Methods for the Analysis of High Di-
mensional Data Sets and 3D Object Recog-
nition. Point Based Graphics 2007, Prague,
September 2007.

[2] M. Costa, A. Goldberger, C.-K. Peng. Mul-
tiscale entropy analysis of complex physi-
ologic time series. Physics Review Letters
Vol. 89 No. 6, August 5, 2002.

[3] Graph images made using Graphviz.

(a) AF

(b) CHF

Figure 5: Mapper outputs, with density as ﬁlter,
from the non-quadratic motifs of (a) an AF patient,
and (b) a CHF patient. The presence of a cycle in
(b) indicates the presence of a non-trivial circle in the
non-quadratic motif space of the patient. This circle
corresponds to oscillatory motifs of similar frequency
but of varying phases.

(MV) of each time series.
In order to test the
signiﬁcance of our QFE features we used various
combinations of the three feature sets to classify
CHF vs. HL. For each combination of feature
sets, we built a simple logistic regression clas-
siﬁer and performed a series of cross validation
tests. The results are shown in Table 3. We
note that it was sometimes necessary to reduce
the number of features using PCA because of the
limited number of examples available.
Though the QFE features alone do not classify
extremely well, our results show that the QFE
features provide a signiﬁcant complement to the
MSE and MV features. We note that any fea-
tures produced by our method should automat-
ically be independent of mean and variance due
to our normalization procedure (Section 2). Due
to the limited size of our AF data set, we did not
run extensive cross validation tests of classiﬁca-

4

