A SVM APPROACH TO STOCK TRADING 
 
Christopher King      Christophe Vandrot      John Weng 

 

 

INTRODUCTION 

Statistical  arbitrage  is  the  application  of modern  statistics,  significant  computing  power, 
and  large  data  sets  to  the  discovery  of  financial  market  mispricing  and  then  exploiting  those 
inefficiencies  for  profit.  Fundamental  analysis  is  the  process  of  analyzing  all  public  company 
disclosures  including  financial  statements  in  the attempt  to uncover  indicators of  future  company 
performance.  In  this  paper,  we  endeavor  to  combine  both  approaches  to  investing  in  pursuit  of  
superior risk adjusted returns.  
There  are  a  large  number  of  market  participants  with  different  views  on  the  correct 
valuation  of  varying  securities  and  these  participants  constantly  update  th eir  own market  outlook 
and  security  views.  The  information  a market  participant may  consider  relevant  on  one  day may 
be considered insignificant by the  same  individual one month  later. The markets are  in a constant 
state  of  flux  of  what  is  critical  for  security  valuation  and  the  monetary  value  to  ascribe  to  this 
information. 
Support Vector Machine  (SVM)  is currently  one of  the most popular  learning algorithms 
and  has  successfully  been  applied  to  numerous  fields.  Its  popularity  can  be  explained  both  by   a 
high generalization performance and  a mathematically well posed training method.  In  the context 
of  financial  data modeling,  SVM  is  particularly  appealing  for  multiple  reasons.  Firstly,  it makes 
no  strong  assumptions  on  the  data.  Secondly,  since  it  is  not  an  empirical  error  minimization 
method,  therefore  it  should  not  over-fit  the  data. These  two  reasons  explain why  SVM  compares 
well  to  other  methods  commonly  used  for  financial  forecasting  such  as  ARIMA  of  Artificial 
Neural Networks  (See  [CaoTay01]).  Further,  in  our  context  of  incorporating  several  features, we 
need an algorithm that handles high dimensional data well, which is the case for SVM.  
 
OBJECTIVES 
 

We chose  to focus on the oil sector of the S&P500 stock index. There are seven stocks  in 
this  group  including  well  known  firms  such  as  Exxon  Mobil  and  Hess  Corp.  This  group  of 
companies offers homogeneous products  leaving  them  to compete on superior business execution 
and  overall  firm  financial  management.  Since  there  is  no  significant  product  differentiation,  we 
believe  security  valuation  is  highly  related  to  financial  statement  metrics  indicating  company 
execution  that  investors  continually  decide  are  more  and  less  important  during  the  evolution  of 
time. 

We  chose  to  use  the  SVM  to  classify  the  relative  performance  of  the  stock  against  the 
performance  of  other  stocks  in  the  sector.  Then  we  manage  a  portfolio  making  investments 
decision  entirely  based  on  the  classification  made  by  the  learning  algorithm.  We  long  (buy)  the 
stocks  that  are  expected  to  outperform,  and  short  (sell)  the  stocks  that  are  expected  to 
underperform  the  sector.  Using  this  approach,  we  are  not  buying  stocks  on  the  expectation  that 
they will rise and selling stocks on the expectation the stock price will fall. Instead, we are buying 
stocks  on  the  expectation  that  the  price  of  the  outperformers  will  rise more  than  the  price  of  the 
underperformers  or  the  price  of  the  outperformers  will  fall  less  than  the  price  of  the 

underperformers. In this manner, we are only predicting the relative performance of one portfolio,  
outperformers, relative to the other, underperformers.  
The  following  table  includes  the  fundamental  measures  we  used  to  input  into  the  SVM 
algorithm. 
  We 
surveyed 
several 
academic 
papers 
([AbarbanellBushee1998], 
[AbarbanellBushee1997],  [LevThiagarajan1993 ],  [Nicoletti2004])  that  described  the  connection 
between  several  of  these measures  and  stock  prices.  Furthermore, we  included   obvious measures 
like  historical  oil  price, which  should  have  a  strong  correlation  to  the  stock  prices  for  companies 
in the oil sector, or information about the trading volume. Also, the features are presented in what 
we expected to be the decreasing order of importance of the features.  
 
 

Inputs 
Historical Price  
Trading Vo lume 
Historical Oil Prices 
P/E Ratio 

Enterprise Value / EBITDA 

Current Assets / Current Liabilit ies  

Total Assets / Total Liabilit ies  
Percentage of Analysts Recommending 
Buy and Sell 
Invest ing Cash Flow / Depreciat ion 

Market Capitalization / Operating Cash 
Flow 
Market Capitalization / Revenue  
Operating Cash Flow / Revenue  

Net Increase (Decrease) Cash / Revenue  

 

Underlying Connection 
 
 
Large driver of  industry costs 
Number of years of earnings equivalent to the current 
company value 
Metric widely used  in private equity to gauge company 
value 
Indicates whether the company may have near term 
financial distress 
Rough  indicat ion of the residual value of the company  
Reflects the opinions of company outsiders that closely 
fo llow the firm 
Indicates whether the firm  is adequately  invest ing for the 
future 
Similar to PE ratio, but with an accounting metric not 
easily manipulated 
The value of the firm relat ive to $1 of revenue  
Percentage of each revenue do llar the firm turns  into 
operating cash flow  
Percentage of each revenue do llar the firm turns  into cash  

DESIGNING OUR EXPERIMENTS 

An  SVM classifier was  applied on each one of  the 7  stocks  in  the oil  sector. Our data  set 
contains  daily  values  of  the  inputs  presented  in  the  table  above  during  the  period  from  January 
2001  to  November  2009.  Our  goal  was  to  forecast  what  would  happen  on  a  particular  day  using 
only  measures  obtained  from  the  5  previous  days. We  used  the  first  6  years  of  data  to  train  the 
algorithm then made forecasts and invested  on a daily basis during the remaining 3 years.  
Using  twice  the  amount  of  data  for  training  than  for  testing  is  a  common  practice  when 
applying SVM classifier. Further, we believe  that the previous 5 days convey enough information 
to forecast the next day’s performance.  
 
The  inputs  we  selected  were  transformed  whenever  we  believe  the  evolution  conveyed  
more  information  than  the  absolute  value  itself.  To  us,  past  stock  prices,  past  index ,  and  trading 
volume all fall in that category. The first two were transformed into daily returns and volume was 
used to derive the difference of the current volume and a moving average mean.  
 
The  SVM  algorithm  was  specified  to  use  the  Gaussian  kernel.  The  resulting  algorithm 
therefore  has  two  parameters:  the  cost  of  misclassifying  and  the  bandwidth  of  the  kernel.  These 
two parameters were determined using a 10-fold cross validation method. 

The  results  we  present  in  the  next  paragraph  were  obtained  using  the  LS -SVMlab  
 
Toolbox for Matlab referenced [ToolBox][LSSVM]. 
 

RESULTS  

Here we present the results we obtained using respectively 1, 5 and 14 features.   
The forecasting performance is presented in the table below.  
 

The algorithm generally predicts correctly more often than incorrectly . Also, having more 
features tends to give a better rate of accurate forecasts but the d ifference of performance is low.  

Stock 
 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

Number of features  

 
Percentage of 
accurate 
forecasts 

1 

5 

51.66 %   50.07 %    51.93%      49.67 %     51.93 %     51.53 %    50.33% 

54.59%      50.33 %     52.20 %    51.26 %     48.87%    

51.00%      51.00% 

14 

54.06 %    51.40%      50.87 %   51.80 %     49.67%      52.46 %    52.60% 

Having a better rate with more than one feature tells us that the additional features would contain 
more information than the stock price itself.  
Our conclusion is that adding the last 9 features is not worth the additional  complexity.  
 
Next, we present the evolution of the corresponding portfolio s. 
 
Using 1 feature: 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
Using 5 features: 

 
 
Using 14 features: 

 

 

 
The  performance  of  the  first  portfolio  is misleading.  One  should  note  that  the  algorithm 
did  not  perform  well  in  terms  of  forecasting  with  only  one  feature.  Also,  looking  at  the  results 
using  5  and  14  features,  it  is  hard  to  see  whether  the  trading  strategy  would  be  appropriate  only 
up to some limited time after the last date of the training set.  
 
CONCLUSION 

An  SVM  classifier  was  successfully  applied  to  forecast  relative  performance  within  the 
oil  sector. The  forecasts made  are  good  in  terms  of  the  percentage  of  accurate  guesses. Also, our 
results  tend  to  show  that  the  features  we  selected  do  contain  information  relating  to  future 
performance. Furthermore, it was clearly illustrated that those predictions, even though they have 
an acceptable rate of good “guesses” would not necessarily lead to profitable strategies. 
There  are  many  reasons  why  we  believe  that  the  appl ication  of  SVM  to  financial 
forecasting  is  still  very  promising.    Further  work  should  focus  on  investigating  the  selection  of 
other meaningful  inputs  among which  could  be  price  volatility,  current  trend,  and  other  financial 
ratios or out of the sector market factors. It would be beneficial if additional transformations such 
as  returns  over  several  periods,  scaling,  detecting  and  removing  outliers  from  the  data  set   be 
carried out using the inputs. See [CaoTay2001] for more details.  
In order  to derive a better  trading  strategy, one  could consider applying  this method over 
longer  time  scales.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  placed  ourselves  in  the  position  of  over -trading:  our 

portfolio’s rate of return would have suffered a lot from taking in to account transaction co sts. On 
the  other  hand,  forecasting  further  in  the  future  is  more  difficult  because  one  no  longer  benefits 
from market persistence.  
Additional  improvements  could  also  address  how  to  adapt  SVM  to  the  specific  purpose 
of  forecasting  financial  data.  Researchers  L. Cao  and  F.  Tay  have  devoted many  research  papers  
to  this  topic,  suggesting  innovative  ideas  such  as  giving  more  weight  to  recent  training  data 
[TayCao2002a], or experts [Cao2003] to take non-stationarity into account.  
 
REFERENCES 

[AbarbanellBushee1998] Abnormal returns to a Fundamental Strategy, Abarbanell, Bushee, The 

Accounting Review, 1998 

[AbarbanellBushee1997] Fundamental Analysis, Future Earnings and Stock Prices, Journal of 

Accounting Research, 1997 

[LevThiagarajan1993] Fundamental Information Analysis, Journal of Accounting Research, 

1993 

[Nicoletti2004] On the Profitability of 12 Fundamental Analysis Strategies on the NASDAQ 100, 

Nicoletti, 2004 

[CaoTay2001]  Financial Forecasting Using Support Vector Machines,   

[TayCao2002a]  ϵ-Descending Support Vector Machines for Financial Times Series Forecasting, 

Tay, Cao, Neural Processing Letters, 2002 

[Cao2003] Support Vector Machines Experts for Times Series Forecasting, Cao, 

Neurocomputing, 2003 

[ToolBox]  LS-SVMlab, Pelckmans et al., http://www.esat.kuleuven.be/sista/lssvmlab/  

[LSSVM] J.A.K. Suykens, T. Van Gestel, J. De Brabanter, B. De Moor, J. Vandewalle,   

Least Squares Support Vector Machines,   

World Scient ific, Singapore, 2002 (ISBN 981-238-151-1) 

