Classification of Synapses Using Spatial Protein Data 
 
Jenny Chen and Micol Marchetti-Bowick 
 
CS229 Final Project • December 11, 2009  

readings  that  directly map  to  (x,y,z)  locations within  a  1-
µm3  cube  centered  at  each  synapse.   These  readings were 
provided  for  a  total  of  11  different  proteins  for  every 
single synapse.   
 
4    MODELS 
In  order  to  be  useful  for  type  classification,  our  model 
needed  to  incorporate  the  distinguishing  characteristics 
of  each  of  the  three  different  categories  of  synapse.1   One 
such  characteristic  is  the  relative  amounts  of  different 
proteins  that  are  present  in  the  region  around  a  synapse.  
We  also  hypothesized  that  the  shape  and  size  of  a 
synapse,  including  the  relative  locations  of  the  regions 
within  the  synapse  where  each  protein  is  most  highly 
concentrated,  would  be  important  indicators  of  its  type.  
Based  on  these  traits,  we  came  up  with  two  different 
models to test.   
 
4.1   Baseline Model 
The  first  model,  which  we  called  our  “baseline”  model, 
represents  synapses  of  a  given  type  as  a  multinomial 
distribution  over  each  of  the  n  proteins  in  the  dataset.  
The  values  of  the  parameters  of  this  multinomial 
represent  the  likelihood  of  encountering  one  unit  of  a 
particular  type  of  protein  in  a  narrow  region  around  the 
synapse.    If x  is  a particular unit of protein density,  and  y 
is the type of the synapse in question, then we have 
P( x | y)  Multinomial (φy1 , ...,φyn −1 )  
 
φyi
where      is  the  likelihood  that  unit  x  originates  from 
protein  i  given  that  the  synapse  is  of  type  y.    Thus,  a 
 
particular synapse is modeled by the relative quantities of 
the  n  proteins  that  it  contains.    This  model  only 
incorporates  the  first  of  the  characteristics  in  which  we 
are interested, but it has the advantage of simplicity.   
 
4.2   Complex Model 
The  next  model  strives  to  capture  the  characteristic 
shape  and  size  of  each  type  of  synapse.    In  order  to 
accomplish  this, we  decided  to  represent  each  synapse  by 
a  multivariate  Gaussian  that  models  its  physical  location 
and shape in either 2-D or 3-D space (we tried both).  We 

                                                 
1 Here we refer to a “non-synapse” as a category of synapse even 
though it technically is not a synapse at all. 

1 

 
 
1    MOTIVATION 
Many  human  neurological  and  cognitive  disorders  are 
caused  in  part  by  aberrancies  in  the  composition  and 
volume  densities  of  synapses  in  the  brain  [1].   The  ability 
to  analyze  the  underlying  causes  of  such  diseases  would 
be  greatly  enhanced  by  detailed  knowledge  about  the 
ratio and quantities of different types of synapses that are 
present in specific regions of a patient’s brain.  In order to 
make  this  possible,  neuroscientists  at  Stanford  and 
elsewhere  are  working  towards  developing  methods  to 
accurately locate and classify individual synapses within a 
sample  of  brain  tissue  [2].   Although many  advances have 
been  made  in  this  area  of  research,  synapse  classification 
still  requires biologists  to manually  analyze  each  synapse 
in  order  to  evaluate  its  type.    Here  we  propose  a 
computational approach to synapse classification based on 
spatial  protein  data.    Not  only  would  the  success  of  this 
method  this  greatly  increase  the  efficiency  of  labeling 
synapses  by  type,  it  could  also  help  to  elucidate  novel 
types of synapses that remain undiscovered as of yet. 
 
2    OVERVIEW 
Our  goal  was  to  use  spatial  information  (location  and 
density)  for  multiple  distinct  proteins  within  a  section  of 
brain  tissue  to  classify  “potential  synapses”  into  one  of 
three categories: excitatory synapses, inhibitory synapses, 
or  non-synapses.    In  order  to  develop  an  effective 
solution  to  this  problem,  we  aimed  to  answer  the  two 
following questions:  
(1)  How  can  we  develop  a  model  that  represents  a 
synapse  accurately  enough  to  enable  us  to  infer 
its type?, and 
(2)  Which  among  the  proteins  from  our  dataset 
provide  the  most  valuable 
information 
for 
classifying  synapses  and  what  does  this  imply 
about their biological function? 

 
3    DATA  
We  obtained  data  from  the  Smith  Laboratory  in  the 
Department  of  Molecular  and  Cellular  Physiology  at 
Stanford.    The  dataset  consists  of  200  labeled  examples, 
each  of  which  is  either  an  excitatory  synapse,  an 
inhibitory  synapse,  or  not  a  synapse.    The  information 
given  for  each  synapse  is  a  series  of  protein  density 

decided  to  experiment  with  three  different  variations  of 
this idea: 
1.  Model each synapse as a single Gaussian. 
2.  Model  each  synapse  as  a  composition  of  n  distinct 
Gaussians, one for each protein. 
3.  Model  each  synapse  as  a  composition  of  two 
distinct  Gaussians,  one  representing  the  pre-
synaptic  region  and  the  other  representing  the 
postsynaptic region.   
The  motivation  for  these  three  slightly  different  models 
came  from  thinking  about  the  physical  structure  of  a 
synapse.   The most  basic variant views  each  synapse  as  a 
single  concentrated  blotch  of  protein  and  models  a 
synapse of a given type as a Gaussian over the location of 
each unit of protein density, so that we have 
P( x | y)  Normal ( 
µy , Σ y )  
 
where P(x|y) is the total likelihood of all protein readings 
from  synapse  x  given  that  the  synapse  is  of  type  y  (here 
we  assume  that  protein  readings  are  independent  when 
conditioned  on  y).   The  next  variant models  each  protein 
blotch  from  a  distinct  source  as  a  separate  Gaussian,  as 
shown  in  Figure  1(a).    The  third  variant  is  based  on  a 
slightly  more  sophisticated  understanding  of  synapse 
structure.    In  reality,  a  synapse  is  not  just  one  or  several 
“blotches”  of  protein.    Instead,  it  is  composed  of  a 
presynaptic  region  and  a  postsynaptic  region  that  are 
responsible  for  carrying  out  different  functions.    Because 
of  this,  different  proteins  localize  to  each  region,  which 
allows  us  to  distinguish  one  from  the  other  in  our  data.  
We  based  the  third  variation  of  our  model,  shown  in 
Figure 1(b), on this inherent biological synapse structure. 

 

(a) 
(b) 
 
Figure  1.  2-D  visualization  of  the  region  surrounding  a  single 
synapse.  Red  pixels  indicate  stronger  protein  readings  (i.e. 
protein  is  very  dense),  blue  pixels  indicate  weak  protein 
readings.  Each  image  also  shows  a  white  point  indicating  the 
mean  location  of  all  protein  units  in  that  image  (location 
weighted  by  pixel  brightness).    (a)  Separate  protein  density 
images  for  each of 5 proteins;  from  left  to  right,  top  to bottom, 
we  have:  gad,  bassoon,  synapsin,  gephyrin,  PSD.  (b)  Protein 
density  images  for  the  presynaptic  region  (left)  and  the 
postsynaptic  region  (right).   The presynaptic  image  is made up 
of  the  cumulative  densities  of  3  presynaptic  proteins:  gad, 
bassoon,  synapsin.    The  postsynaptic  image  is  made  up  of  the 
cumulative  densities  of  2  postsynaptic  proteins:  gephyrin,  PSD.  
Notice  that  the  presynaptic  and  postsynaptic  regions  are 
slightly offset.   

5    METHODOLOGY 
Multinomial 
and  multinomial 
regression 
logisitic 
Gaussian  discriminant  analysis  (GDA)  were  used  to  fit 
and  test  our  various  models.    Because  of  our  small  data 
set size, we used  leave-one-out cross validation (LOOCV) 
to estimate the generalization error of our models. 
 
5.1   Logistic Regression & Feature Selection  
We  began  by  using  logistic  regression  to  compare  our 
baseline  and  complex  models.    In  order  to  test  our 
baseline  model,  we  calculated  the  normalized  protein 
distribution  of  each  synapse  in  our  data  set  and  trained 
our  logistic  regression  classifier  on  these  n  features  (one 
for each protein).   
 
We  next  wanted  to  determine  which  aspects  of  our 
complex  models  contributed  the  most  useful  information 
to  the  classifier.    To  do  this,  we  first  applied  each  of  the 
three models to every individual synapse in order to learn 
a  set  of  parameters  for  that  synapse.    From  these 
parameters, we extracted  five representative  features that 
we  hypothesized  would  be  valuable  in  classifying  the 
synapses into types: 
1.  Variance  of  the  locations  of  proteins  weighted  by 
density,  averaged  across  all  dimensions  of  the  data 
(e.g.  in  2-D,  we  take  the  average  of  var(x)  and 
var(y)), for each of the 11 proteins (n features, 1 per 
protein).    This  is  intended  to  be  a  measure  of  how 
diffuse each protein is within the synaptic region. 
2.  Variance of the mean  locations of each protein  (e.g. 
var(µ1,...,µn)  where  µi  =  mean  location  of  protein  i 
weighted by density at each location) (1 feature).  
3.  Variance  of  the  locations  of  presynaptic  proteins 
and  variance  of  the  locations  of  postsynaptic 
proteins,  both  weighted  by  density  and  averaged 
across  all  dimensions  of  the  data. 
is 
  This 
analogous  to  feature  1  but  for  the  pre-  and  post- 
synaptic regions (2 features). 
4.  Variance  of  the  mean  locations  of  the  presynaptic 
proteins  and  variance  of  the  mean  locations  of  the 
postsynaptic proteins (2 features). 
5.  Difference  from  the  average  distance  between  the 
presynaptic  mean  and  the  postsynaptic  mean  (e.g. 
compared  to  the  average,  how  far  is  this  synapse’s 
presynaptic  mean  from  its  postsynaptic  mean?)  (1 
feature).  
The 
first  two 
features  model  the  synapse  as  a 
composition  of  n  proteins,  while  the  last  three  features 
model  the  synapse  as  a  composition  of  presynaptic  and 
postsynaptic regions.   
 
We ran  logistic regression using each of these  features  in 
conjunction with  the baseline  feature  (normalized protein 
distribution)  and  compared  the  results. 
  We  also 

2 

performed  each  test  using  both  2-D  features  (i.e.  features 
extracted  along  a  fixed  z-plane)  and  3-D  features  to 
compare the information gained in three dimensions. 
  
We  found  that  many  of  the  above  features  contributed 
little  or  nothing  to  the  accuracy  of  the  classifier.    The 
feature  that  helped  the  most  was  the  measure  of  how 
diffuse  each  protein  is within  the  synaptic  region  (feature 
1).    In  addition, we discovered  that models  that used 3-D 
features  consistently  matched  or  outperformed  models 
that  were  based  on  2-D  data.    Finally,  we  found  that 
using  smaller  regions  to  extract  features  significantly 
improved the accuracy of our model (Figure 3). 

three 
for  all 
three-dimensional  data 
We  used 
implementations  and  restricted  our  analysis  to  using  the 
five proteins gad, bassoon, synapsin, gephyrin, and PSD (the 
first three of which are presynaptic proteins, and the  last 
two  of  which  are  postsynaptic  proteins).    We  obtained 
the  best  results  using  model  2,  which  maintains  a 
separate representation  for the regions of density of each 
protein,  rather  than  massing  them  together  (Figure  4).  
However,  neither  of  the  three  achieved  a  particularly 
high accuracy.  
 

 
 
Figure 3. Accuracy of multinomial logistic regression classifier 
using  each  of  the  six  2-D  features  and  3-D  features  in 
conjunction  with  protein  distribution  alone.    Feature  1,  the 
measure  of  how  diffuse  each  protein  is,  contributed  the  most 
accuracy  out  of  all  the  features.      Additionally,  we  see  from 
column  1  that  3D  features  extracted  from  a  “small  region”  (a 
7x7x7  pixel  area)  provided  more  accuracy  than  the  “large 
region” (11x11x11 pixels). 
 
5.2   Gaussian Discriminant Analysis (GDA) 
To  further  explore our  complex models, we  implemented 
a GDA algorithm to fit parameters to our data for each of 
the three models: 
Model 1: We fit a single multivariate Gaussian to 
each of the three types of synapses.   
Model  2:  We  modeled  a  separate  Gaussian  over 
each  protein  to  characterize  each  synapse  type  by 
a set of n Gaussians.   
Model  3:  Finally,  we 
learnt  a  presynaptic 
Gaussian  and  a  postsynaptic  Gaussian  for  each 
synapse type.   
After learning each model, we classified new synapses by 
calculating  P(x|y),  the  probability  that  synapse  x  was 
generated  by  the  Gaussian  model(s)  with  parameters 
µy_1,...,µy_d and Σy_1,...,Σy_d (where d = 1 for model 1, d = n 
for model  2,  d =  2  for model  3)  and P(y),  the  probability 
of  encountering  a  synapse  of  type  y.    We  calculated 
P(x|y)P(y)  for  every  y  and  selected  the  type  category 
with highest probability.   
 

 
Figure 4. Accuracy of multinomial GDA classifier using each 
of the three complex models.  Model 2, which represents each 
protein separately, was the most successful. 
 
6    RESULTS 
Our  most  successful  classification  was  realized  using 
logistic  regression  operating  on  the  baseline  protein 
distribution  along  with  feature  set  1  (measures  of  how 
diffuse  each  protein  is)  in  three  dimensions.    Our  model 
yielded 84% accuracy with an ROC AUC of 0.79  for non-
synapse/synapse  classification  and  0.96  for  excitatory 
/inhibitory synapse classification.  In comparison, logistic 
regression  operating  only  on  the  baseline  model  of  2-D 
protein  distribution  yields  77%  accuracy  with  an  ROC 
AUC  of  0.71  for  non-synapse/synapse  classification  and 
0.93 
for  excitatory/inhibitory  synapse  classification 
(Figure 4).   
 

   
Figure  4.  Final  ROC  curves  comparing  baseline  and  complex 
models  in  differentiating  between  non-synapses  and  synapses 
(left)  and  differentiating  between  excitatory  and  inhibitory 
synapses  (right).    Here,  “Protein  Concentration”  refers  to 
Feature 1 in 2D. 
 

 

3 

7    BIOLOGICAL RELEVANCE 
Though  we  began  with  feature  information  for  11 
proteins,  this  was  far  too  much  information  to  train  on 
with  only  200  data  points.    Using  forward  search,  we 
determined a subset of four proteins that yielded maximal 
accuracy: bassoon, synapsin, gad, and PSD.  We trained and 
tested  our  model  using  each  protein  alone  to  infer  the 
relative  importance  of  each  protein  (Figure  5).    synapsin 
was  found  to  be  the  best  at  distinguishing  between  non-
synapses  and  synapses  and  gad  was  the  most  useful  for 
distinguishing  between 
excitatory 
and 
inhibitory 
synapses.    These  results  agree  with  the  currently  known 
functions  of  these  proteins.    synapsin  is  thought  to  be 
present  in  every  synapse,  which  explains  its  strong 
performance  in  distinguishing  between  synapses  and 
non-synapses,  and  gad  is  known  to  be  a  good  marker  of 
inhibitory synapses [3,4]. 

Figure  5.  ROC  of  each  protein  alone  in  ability  to  distinguish 
between  non-synapses  and  synapses 
(left)  and  between 
excitatory and inhibitory synapses (right). 
 
8    DISCUSSION 
Our  results  show  that  the  protein  distribution  at  a 
synapse  is  by  far  the  best  predictive  characteristic  of  the 
data  that  we  have  for  synapse  type.    This  result  is 
unsurprising  because  it  is  based  in  biological  fact: 
proteins have very  specific biologic  functions and  localize 
to  specific  synapse  types.    Here,  we  also  explored  other 
features  of  the  data  that would  enrich  our  synapse model 
and  improve  our  classification  accuracy.    We  attempted 
to represent the shape and size of synapses  in a variety of 
ways.    We  included  certain  shape/size  features  as  input 
to  our 
logistic  regression  classifier,  and  we  also 
implemented  a  multiclass  GDA  algorithm  that  modeled 
each  class  (i.e.  each  synapse  type)  as  a  different Gaussian 
or set of Gaussians.  Although not all of these approaches 
were  successful,  our  results  clearly  demonstrate  that  the 
shape  and  size  of  a  synapse  are  relevant  to  its  type.   We 
have two results that lead us to this conclusion.  First, we 
saw  that when we  added  a measure  of  how  “diffuse”  each 
protein  is  at  the  synapse  as  an  input  feature  to  our 
logistic  regression  classifier,  our  accuracy  improved.  

 

4 

Secondly,  our  GDA  classifier  was  most  successful  when 
using  a  model  that  represented  the  density  units  from 
each protein as a separate Gaussian distribution. 
 
In  general,  our  GDA  classifier  was  less  successful  than 
our  logistic  regression  classifier.    We  believe  that  the 
principal  reason  for  the  discrepancy  between  the  two  is 
that  our  GDA  model  did  not  explicitly  include  a 
representation  of  the  relative  amounts  of  each  protein 
present within  each  type of  synapse, which has proven  to 
be  a  very  powerful  feature.    However,  it  is  interesting  to 
note  that  GDA  using  complex  model  2  was  still  quite 
successful even without this feature. 
 
Although  we  tested  many  features 
in  our  logistic 
regression  classifier,  only  a  few  actually  contributed  to 
improving  our  accuracy.    One  model  in  particular  that 
seemed  to  be  of  little  worth  is  the  pre-/post-  synaptic 
region  model.    The  features  extracted  from  this  model 
did  not  help  with  logistic  regression,  nor  did  it  produce 
good results when used as a basis for GDA.  One possible 
reason  for  this  is  that  the pre-/post-  synaptic  regions  are 
not well represented within the data.  The resolution may 
actually  be  too  low  to  capture  a  clear  relationship 
between the two regions. 
  
There were many other complicating  factors that made  it 
difficult  to  extract  useful  features  and  construct  an 
accurate  synapse  model.    For  example,  it  is  possible  that 
some  of  the  labeled  regions  we  were  working  with 
actually  contained  multiple  synapses  of  different  classes.  
These mixed signals certainly contributed to our inability 
to achieve above a maximum of 84% accuracy.    
 
Finally, we were  constricted by  the  fact  that we had very 
few  training  examples  to  work  with;  we  only  had  a  total 
of  200  labeled  synapses.    Furthermore,  within  this  set, 
less  than  1/5  of  our  examples  were  non-synapses,  which 
could  explain  why  our  ability  to  distinguish  synapses 
from  non-synapses  is  much  poorer  than  our  ability  to 
distinguish excitatory synapses from inhibitory ones. 
 

 
 
Figure 6. Learning Curve for multinomial logistic regression 
classifier trained on our complex model. 
 
Another  consequence  of  our  small  dataset  was  that  our 
classifier  has  fairly  high  variance,  indicated  by  the  fact 

that  the  test  error  is much higher  than  the  training  error 
(see  learning  curve  plotted  in  Figure  6).  However,  we 
believe  that  this  could  be  easily  fixed  with  a  larger 
training set size.  
 
It  is  worth  noting  that  labeling  of  synapses  by  hand  is  a 
difficult  problem  in  itself  and  has  a  fairly  high  error  rate. 
Therefore,  our  84%  accuracy  rate may  or may  not  reflect 
biological  truth.    Ideally,  a  computational  approach  such 
as  the  one  proposed  here  could  be  used  in  conjunction  to 
elucidate biology.  For example, synapses that get labeled 
as  non-synapses  by  a  computational  method  are  ideal 
candidates  to  be  reexamined  by  a  neuroscientist  to 
determine  whether  they  were  incorrectly  labeled  or 
perhaps  belong  to  a  novel  type  of  synapse  that  does  not 
fall into either the excitatory or inhibitory category.   
 
9    FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The  inability  of  any  of  our  classifiers  to  surpass  an 
accuracy  level  of  84%  may  be  due  in  large  part  to  the 
noise  that  exists  in  our  data.    None  of  the  models  we 
propose  account  this  noise,  even  though  it  almost 
certainly impacts the features we use.   
 
One  important  source  of  error  is  the  inaccuracy  which 
accrues  from  the  wetlab  techniques  that  are  used  to 
generate  our  data.      The  spatial  protein  data  we  use  is 
collected  using  a  technique  called 
immunostaining, 
whereby  fluorescence  markers  are  bound  to  proteins 
present  in  the  tissue.    However,  these  markers  are  not 
guaranteed  to  bind  evenly  across  all  proteins,  which  can 
lead to a misrepresentation of the true underlying protein 
densities.    For  example,  it  is  possible  that  synapsin  was 
simply  not  detected  at  a  particular  location, which might 
lead  to  that  region  to  be  inaccurately  classified  as  a  non-
synapse even though all other features indicate otherwise.   
 
A  possible  extension  to  our  project  would  be  to  modify 
and  extend  our  model  so  that  it  takes  this  noise  into 
 

account  and  is  able  to  adjust  for  the  possibility  that  the 
data is not 100% accurate.   
 
Another  source  of  complexity 
is  the  potential  for 
synapses  to  overlap  within  the  brain.    Currently,  the 
model we use would inherently interpret two overlapping 
synapses  as  a  single  entity,  which  again  leads  to  a 
misrepresentation  of  the  data.    A  model  and  inference 
strategy  that  could  account  for  this  situation  as  well 
would be all the more powerful.   
 
Another exciting direction in which to take this project in 
the  future  would  be  an  attempt  to  apply  an  unsupervised 
learning  algorithm  to  cluster  synapses  into  different 
types  based  on  the  features  that  we’ve  found  to  be  most 
salient.  This approach could move beyond distinguishing 
between  the  three  basic  categories  that  we’ve  discussed 
(excitatory,  inhibitory,  non-synapse)  and  potentially may 
reveal  new  classes  of  synapses  that might  be  biologically 
significant.   
 
REFERENCES 
1.  Fiala,  J.C.,  Spacek,  J.,  and  Harris,  K.M.  (2002).  
Dendritic  Spine  Pathology:  Cause  or  Consequence  of 
Neruological  Disorders?  Brain  Research  Reviews  39, 
29-54. 
2.  Micheva,  K.  and  Smith,  S.J. 
(2007).  Array 
Tomography:  A  New  Tool 
for  the  Molecular 
Architecture  and  Ultrastructure  of  Neural  Circuits. 
Neuron. 55, 25-36. 
3.  De  Camilli,  P.,  Cameron,  R.,  and  Greengard,  P. 
(1983).  Synapsin  I  (protein  I),  a  nerve  terminal-
specific  phosphoprotein.  I.  Its  general  distribution  in 
synapses  of  the  central  and  peripheral  nervous 
system  demonstrated  by 
immunofluorescence 
in 
frozen and plastic sections.  J. Cell Biol. 96, 1337–54. 
4.  Soghomonian,  J-J.,  and  Martin  J.L.  (1998).  Two 
isoforms  of  glutamate  decarboxylase:  why?  Trends  in 
Pharmocol Sci. 19(12), 500-5.  

5 

