Musical Instrument Signal Separation from
Popular Songs

Seung Hoon Choi
Fall 2009 CS 229 Final Pro ject
Final Report

December 11, 2009

1

Introduction

Signal separation from mix has been an interest of research in recent years,
and many learning algorithms and variations have been developed.
In this
paper we focus on separation of speciﬁc type of signal with practical application:
musical instrument signal separation. The result of such separation can be used
by amateur instrument players to listen to their part of a given music more
clearly, and learn how to play their part. We experiment with existing learning
algorithms to separate a single musical instrument from popular music MP3 ﬁle.
This experiment will hopefully reveal particular nature of the target instrument
and we will be able to extend and modify the learning algorithm to get better
performance.

2 Experimentation

Idea is to use blind source separation unsupervised learning algorithms. For this
idea, we start with independent component analysis, and follow with diﬀerent
and/or extended algorithms to get better performance. Many variations of ICA
algorithms are implemented in ICALAB software package [2][1].
ICALAB is
used extensively for the experiment.

3 Using standard ICA

For the experiment, we use MP3 ﬁle of Nirvana’s Smells Like Teen Spirit. The
following two channels are ﬁrst several seconds of the song:
Using oﬀ-the-shelf ICA algorithm returns two signals below:
Though it is hard to see from the signal outputs, the ﬁrst signal is almost
identcal to the original music, while the second result sounds louder and dis-
torted when conﬁrmed by converting back to mp3 and play it.

1

Figure 1: Channel 1 (left) and channel 2 (right) of MP3

Figure 2: Result

4 Dynamical Embedding

An interesting application of ICA has been studied in neuroscience area in [3]. In
the paper the authors apply standard ICA algorithm to separate out diﬀerent
brain signals from a single mixture of brain signals. They do so by using a
technique called dynamical embedding. Assumption of dynamic embedding is
that the measured signal is due to non-linear interaction of just a few degrees of
freedome, with additive noise. This suggests the existence of an unobservable
deterministic generator of the observed data. This is applied to music signal to
separate out independent components.
Basic idea is to construct dynamic embedding matrix out of a series of delay
vectors from the mixture, then feed it to standard ICA algorithm. One way to
construct a DE matrix is from a series of delay vectors taken from the observed
data x(t), where the state of the unobservable system at time t, X(t), is given
by

X (t) = x(t − τ ), x(t − 2τ ), · · · , x(t − (m − 1)τ )

(1)

2

where τ is the lag and m is the number of lags or the embedding dimension.


Let N stand for the number of delay vectors then DE matrix is given by
· · ·
xt+N τ
xt+τ
xt
· · ·
xt+(N +1)τ
xt+2τ
xt+τ
...
...
...
. . .
· · ·
xt+(m+N −1)τ
xt+(m−1)τ xt+mτ
Each delay vectors of the observed signal is pictorially:

X =

(2)

Figure 3: Delay vectors from observed signal

5 Results

In order to ease the inspection of results in signals, I have instead run the
algorithm with a mixture of two signals, one signal representing a vocal sound,
the other representing musical instrument playing along with the vocal. Also,
these are truly single-channel wave ﬁle format. The following represents the two
original signals, and mixture of the two:

3

Figure 4: Original vocal signal

Figure 5: Original musical instrument signal

Figure 6: Mixture of the two signals

The delay vectors, and DE matrix is generated with τ = 1 and m = 2 (two
original signals), and using ICA algorithm, the result is following:

Figure 7: Results

4

0.511.52x 104−0.6−0.4−0.200.20.40.6loaded wave file: /home/choi/cs229/fp/dyrcj_voice.wav channel 1ampTime (msecs)0.511.52x 104−0.5−0.4−0.3−0.2−0.100.10.20.30.40.5loaded wave file: /home/choi/cs229/fp/dyrcj_piccolo.wav channel 1ampTime (msecs)0.511.52x 104−0.8−0.6−0.4−0.200.20.40.60.8loaded wave file: /home/choi/cs229/fp/dyrcj_mix.wav channel 1ampTime (msecs)6 Conclusion

The result signals show some resemblance to the original signals, and it is in-
teresting to use the standard ICA algorithm, which usually requires as many
signals as the number of sources, to separate a single-channel mixture with-
out changes to the algorithm. Although the results are not as clean as some
other more complex techniques, it should be interesting to see how changing the
parameters could give better results.

References

[1] A. Cichocki and S. Amari. Adaptive blind signal and image processing:
Learning algorithms and applications, 2003.

[2] A. Cichocki, S. Amari, K. Siwek, T. Tanaka, and A. H. P. et al.
toolboxes. http://www.bsp.brain.riken.jp/ICALAB.

Icalab

[3] C. J. James and D. Lowe. Extracting multisource brain activity from a single
electromagnetic channel. Artiﬁcial Intel ligence in Medicine, 2003.

5

