1 

 
December 11, 2009 
CS229 Final Project 
 
Andrew Beck 
Winnie Cheng 
Franklin Wu 

Integrated Analysis of Breast Cancer Gene Expression, Morphology, and Patient Survival 

 
Acknowledgements: We received support on this work from Professor Daphne Koller, Stephen Gould,  and Daniela Witten. We 
thank Drs Rob West, Matt van de Rijn, and Marc van de Vijver for providing access to the NKI breast cancer images. 
  
I. Introduction 
Since the mid-19th century, scientists have recognized that the process of carcinogenesis produces characteristic morphological 
changes in cancer cells. To this day, careful morphological analysis of microscopic images remains the single most important 
diagnostic tool used to classify cancer in routine clinical practice. In the past decade, the molecular understanding of cancer has 
increased tremendously, driven in large part by gene expression profiling experiments, which quantify the expression of virtually 
all known transcripts in the human genome[2]. Despite widespread acceptance of the clinically and biologically useful 
information contained in both morphological features and gene expression profiles, there has to date been no effort to 
systematically integrate gene expression changes in cancer with a computational assessment of morphologic changes.  
 
In this paper, we developed tools to permit an integrative analysis of gene expression and morphology, thus allowing the 
identification of gene sets that are associated with morphologic phenotypes. To accomplish this, we first developed image 
analysis tools to permit the measurement of tissue and cellular structures in breast cancer microscopic images. We then applied 
sparse canonical correlation analysis (CCA) to identify relatively small sets of genes that show maximal correlation with 
relatively small sets of image features. Lastly, we assessed the association of a score integrating data from image and gene 
feature with patient survival. This analysis permits the first steps towards a molecular understanding of the morphologic 
variability in breast cancer and suggest pathways through which molecular changes drive tumor morphologic changes, which 
ultimately impact patient outcome. 
 
 
II. Materials and Methods 
IIa. Breast Cancer Dataset 
We are using the Netherlands Cancer Institute (NKI) dataset, which contains gene expression profiling data (~24K probes per 
sample) and survival data from 295 breast cancer patients [13]. This data is publically available (http://microarray-
pubs.stanford.edu/wound_NKI/explore.html). In addition to the gene expression microarray and clinical data, we have obtained 
1282 (~5 images per patient) microscopic images of H&E stained breast cancer histologic sections from 249 of the NKI patients.  
 
IIb. Epithelial/Stromal and Nuclear/Cytoplasmic Segmentation 
Epithelial cancers are composed of two tissue compartments: the malignant epithelium (which contains the breast cancer cells) 
and the cancer stroma, which contains a milieu of "supportive" cell types (including fibroblasts, endothelial cells, and smooth 
muscle cells)[1]. The epithelium itself is comprised of individual epithelial cells, each of which contains a nucleus (with the 
cell's genetic material) as well as the cytoplasm. All tissue and cellular compartments of cancer undergo changes, but these 
changes are often most profound in the epithelial nuclei, as the nuclei contain DNA, and cancer is primarily a disease of genetic 
abnormalities (acquired and/or inherited). Therefore, an important first stage of our project was to develop a classifier to separate 
epithelium from stroma, and then to develop a second classifier to work within epithelial cells to separate nuclei from cytoplasm. 
 
To develop a classifier to distinguish tissue regions (epithelium and stroma) and cellular regions (nucleus and 
cytoplasm), we adapted a standard pixelwise CRF model, as described as the baseline method in Gould et al. [5]. Given an 
image â„  composed of pixels ğ‘, region class labels ğ‘†, and pixel appearance vector ğ›¼ğ‘ , this model took the form of a unified 
energy function: 
ğ¸  ğ‘† â„  =     ğœ“ğ‘  ğ‘†ğ‘ , ğ‘†ğ‘ ;   ğ›¼ğ‘ , ğ›¼ğ‘  
+  ğœƒ   ğœ“ğ‘ğ‘  ğ‘†ğ‘ , ğ‘†ğ‘ ; ğ›¼ğ‘ ğ›¼ğ‘  
, where ğœ“ğ‘  is a multi-class logistic over boosted appearance 
ğ‘
ğ‘ğ‘
features, ğœ“ğ‘ğ‘ is a boundary penalty to encourage adjacent pixels to take the same value, and ğœƒ  are model parameters. The model 
was implemented using functions provided in the STAIR vision library [6]. For each pixel in the training set, the local pixel 
appearance vector ğ›¼ğ‘  was constructed with both raw image features of the pixel and of surrounding pixels. The raw features 
measured for the pixel and surrounding pixels are the 17-dimensional color and texture features determined in Shotton et al.[11]. 
In training the classifier, the raw image features are augmented by region predictions made by a one-vs-all boosted classifier 
trained on the raw features of a given pixel's neighboring pixels. Inference of region label is performed with a two-sage hill 
climbing approach to minimize the energy function.  

2 

 
 
To obtain ground truth labels, a pathologist (AB) manually labeled a subset of images (65 images were labeled for the 
epithelial/stromal classifier). After epithelial/stromal segmentation and prior to nuclear segmentation, the epithelial images were 
further processed to remove inflammatory cells, by implementing the strel and imopen functions in Matlab, which 
morphologically open the image based on a structure element. A threshold is then applied to this opened image and the pixel 
locations of the thresholded image are mapped to the original image of epithelium, with most inflammatory cells (which tend to 
be smaller and less cohesive than the epithelial cells) filtered out. Following this step, ground truth labels were obtained for 
nuclei and cytoplasm from 7 images and a nuclear/cytoplasmic classifier was trained and applied to the segmented epithelial 
regions. Following identification of nuclear regions (as described above), we performed segmentation of individual nuclei using 
an adaptive Otsu approach [10]. 
 
IIc. Image feature extraction 
To measure epithelial and stromal image features, we have developed an epithelial nuclear feature measurement pipeline and a 
stromal feature measurement pipeline using the open source CellProfiler software (http://www.cellprofiler.org/), which 
implements routines in Matlab. We measured a variety of descriptors of image texture and heterogeneity as well as nuclear size, 
shape, intensity, texture, and crowding. Following development of the image feature extractions pipelines, we used the analytic 
pipelines to measure 120 epithelial features and 120 stromal features from our set of 1282 images obtained from 249 patients. 
For features measured from individual nuclei, we summarized the measurements per image by taking the mean. This process 
produced a 249 patient by 240 image feature data matrix. 
 
IId. Identification of sets of genes that show maximal correlation with sparse sets of morphologic features 
A primary goal of this project was to identify gene expression patterns that show maximal correlation with morphological 
phenotypes. A natural unsupervised learning algorithm for achieving this goal is canonical correlation analysis (CCA). The CCA 
procedure was initially proposed by Hotelling in 1936 [8] and can be applied to this project as follows: Let X1 denote the n x p1 
data matrix of image features with n samples and p1 image features, and let X2 denote the n x p2 data matrix of gene expression 
features with n samples and p2 gene expression features. We first standardize the features in each dataset to have mean zero and 
standard deviation of 1. The CCA procedure will produce a p1 dimensional weight vector w1 and a p2 dimensional weight vector 
w2 that maximize the CCA criterion:  
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹2
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹1ğ‘¤1 =   ğ‘¤2
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹1
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2  ğ‘ ğ‘¢ğ‘ğ‘—ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡  ğ‘¡ğ‘œ ğ‘¤1
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹1
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2 = 1 
ğ‘šğ‘ğ‘¥ğ‘–ğ‘šğ‘–ğ‘§ğ‘’ğ‘¤ 1 ğ‘¤ 2 ğ‘¤1
Standard CCA is difficult to implement with high dimensional data, where the numbers of features measured (p) far exceeds  the 
number of samples (n). Given the large number of image and gene features measured in our study, we chose to implement a 
penalized form of CCA to produce sparse linear combinations of genes highly correlated with sparse linear combinations of 
image features. We implemented penalized CCA using the technique of Witten et al.[14, 15] with the package "PMD" in the R 
language for statistical computing (http://cran.r-project.org/). The sparse CCA criterion is as follows: 
2
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2  ğ‘ ğ‘¢ğ‘ğ‘—ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡  ğ‘¡ğ‘œ   ğ‘¤1   
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹1
â‰¤  1,   ğ‘¤2   
â‰¤   ğ‘2 ğ‘2 ,   ğ‘¤1   
  â‰¤   ğ‘1 ğ‘1 ,   ğ‘¤2   
ğ‘šğ‘ğ‘¥ğ‘–ğ‘šğ‘–ğ‘§ğ‘’ğ‘¤ 1 ğ‘¤ 2 ğ‘¤1
1
1
The L1 (Lasso [12]) penalty applied to the weight vectors (w1 and w2) (  ğ‘¤1   
  â‰¤   ğ‘1 ğ‘1 ,   ğ‘¤2   
â‰¤   ğ‘2 ğ‘2 ) has the effect of 
1
1
driving most weights to zero for small values of the tuning parameter c, resulting in sparse and more easily interpretable se ts of 
image and gene features with non-zero weights. It is noted that the sparse CCA criterion is biconvex, and with ğ‘¤1  fixed is 
convex in ğ‘¤2 , and with ğ‘¤2  fixed is convex in ğ‘¤1 , and thus can be solved by an iterative algorithm, in which ğ‘¤2  is initialized to 
have an ğ¿2  norm 1 and the following 2 steps are repeated until convergence [15]:  
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹1
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2  ğ‘ ğ‘¢ğ‘ğ‘—ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡  ğ‘¡ğ‘œ   ğ‘¤1   
  â‰¤   ğ‘1 ğ‘1 ,   ğ‘¤1   
1) ğ‘¤1 â‰” arg ğ‘šğ‘ğ‘¥ğ‘¤ 1 ğ‘¤1
1
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2  ğ‘ ğ‘¢ğ‘ğ‘—ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡  ğ‘¡ğ‘œ   ğ‘¤2   
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹1
  â‰¤   ğ‘2 ğ‘2 ,   ğ‘¤2   
â‰¤  1 
2) ğ‘¤2 â‰” arg ğ‘šğ‘ğ‘¥ğ‘¤ 2 ğ‘¤1
1
To select the penalty terms c1 and c2, we evaluated ten sets of c1 and c2 values evenly spaced within a range from 1 to âˆšp1 and 
âˆšp2, respectively. During each of these ten trials, sparse CCA is performed with a given set of tuning parameters c1 and c2 to 
generate a pair of weight vectors (w1,w2) and the value of ğ¶ğ‘œğ‘Ÿ ğ‘‹1ğ‘¤1 , ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2   is recorded. The significance of the 
ğ¶ğ‘œğ‘Ÿ(ğ‘‹1ğ‘¤1 , ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2 ) for a given set of c1 and c2 is estimated by permutations. We performed 200 permutations. During each, the 
âˆ—  ğ‘ğ‘›ğ‘‘  ğ‘‹2
âˆ— . Sparse CCA was then performed on the permuted 
samples in X1 and X2 are randomly permuted to obtain matrices ğ‘‹1
âˆ—  ğ‘ğ‘›ğ‘‘  ğ‘¤2
âˆ—  and ğ¶ğ‘œğ‘Ÿ(ğ‘‹1
âˆ—ğ‘¤1
âˆ— , ğ‘‹2
âˆ—ğ‘¤2
âˆ— ). The sparse CCA algorithm then implements Fisher's transformation to 
data to generate ğ‘¤1
convert the real correlation and set of 200 permuted correlations into random variables that were approximately normally 
distributed, which we denote as fc and fc*. A p value is then computed for each pair of w1,w2 resulting from a given value of the 
tuning parameter c, as the fraction of the 200 fc* that exceed fc. We ultimately selected tuning parameters c1 and c2 that gave a 
high ğ¶ğ‘œğ‘Ÿ(ğ‘‹1ğ‘¤1 , ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2 ), low p value, and an easily interpretable number of non-zero weights. To compute a second 
approximately orthogonal set of feature weights (w1 , w2 ) 2  , it is noted that the the sparse CCA criterion can be re-formulated as 
2
2
ğ‘‡ ğ‘1ğ‘¤2  ğ‘ ğ‘¢ğ‘ğ‘—ğ‘’ğ‘ğ‘¡  ğ‘¡ğ‘œ   ğ‘¤1   
ğ‘‡ ğ‘‹2 . Z2 is then 
  â‰¤   ğ‘1 ğ‘1 ,   ğ‘¤2   
â‰¤   ğ‘2 ğ‘2 ,   ğ‘¤1   
â‰¤  1,   ğ‘¤2   
maximizing: ğ‘¤1
â‰¤  1, where ğ‘1 =   ğ‘‹1
1
1

â‰¤  1 

â‰¤  1 

2

2

2

3 

 
ğ‘‡ . The optimization problem stated above is then repeated with Z2 replacing Z1.  We chose to 
computed as ğ‘1 âˆ’   ğ‘¤1 ğ‘1ğ‘¤2ğ‘¤1ğ‘¤2
compute only two factors for this project; however, the above procedure may be repeated to obtain as many sets of weight 
vectors as desired[7]. 
 
IId. Analysis of Functional Gene Set Enrichment 
Following identification of genes with non-zero values in the gene weight vector for factors 1 and 2, we identified biological 
pathways significantly enriched in the sets of genes positively and negatively associated with the linear combination of image 
features by uploading our gene sets to the DAVID set of bioinformatics resources[9] and identifying clusters of annotation terms 
with highly significant enrichment in our gene sets. 
 
IIe. Survival analysis 
To assess the association of the image gene feature combinations with survival, we computed a single score for each patient that 
we called the Image-Gene Score (IGS), which was simply the sum of the linear combinations of image features and gene 
features for the two factors. For a given sample (i), where ğ‘‹(ğ‘– )  denotes the ith row of matrix X and ğ‘¤ (ğ‘˜ )  denotes the weight vector 
for the kth factor :  

(2) +   ğ‘‹2(ğ‘– )ğ‘¤2
(1) +   ğ‘‹1(ğ‘– )ğ‘¤1
(1) +   ğ‘‹2(ğ‘– )ğ‘¤2
(2)
ğ¼ğºğ‘† (ğ‘– ) =   ğ‘‹1(ğ‘– )ğ‘¤1
 
To assess, the association of the IGS score with survival, we discretized the scores into three quantiles, plotted Kaplan Meier 
survival curves, and performed the log-rank test to assess statistical significance. To assess the additive effect of the IGS for 
predicting survival in a multivariate model containing histologic grade, we fitted a Cox proportional hazards model[3] and 
computed p values to assess the probability that the IGS and grade were each contributing to the predictive accuracy of the 
model.  
 
 
III. Results 
IIIa. Development of Epithelial/Stromal Classifier and Nuclear/Cytoplasmic Classifier 
For the purposes of quantitatively assessing accuracy, we trained the classifier on 2/3 of our labeled images and tested it on the 
remaining 1/3. The epithelial/stromal classifier achieved an overall accuracy of 84% with recall/precision of 0.93/0.95 on 
background, 0.80/0.79 on epithelium, and 0.82/0.81 on stroma. An example test image is provided in Figure 1. We have not yet 
labeled enough nuclear/cytoplasmic regions on images to permit a quantitative evaluation of the nuclear/cytoplasmic classifie r 
on new images, but it achieved an overall accuracy of ~92% on the training images and qualitatively performed well on the new 
images in the dataset. We also have not yet quantitatively assessed the accuracy of the nuclear region segmentation or nuclear 
measurements; however, they appear to work well in most cases. 

 
Figure 1. Segmented breast cancer image from test set. A. H&E stained microscopic image of breast cancer. B. Image with 
superimposed labeling of epithelium (red) and stroma (green). C. Outlines of segmented stromal nuclei objects. D. H&E stained 
segmented epithelial region. E. Epithelial region is further subdivided into nuclear (red) and cytoplasmic (green) regions. F. 
Outlines of segmented epithelial nuclei objects. 
 
IIIb. Identification of highly correlated gene expression and image features As described in materials and methods, we 
performed sparse canonical correlation analysis with 2 factors and selected tuning parameters c1 and c2 based on the resulting 
ğ¶ğ‘œğ‘Ÿ(ğ‘‹1ğ‘¤1 , ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2 ), significance of the correlation, and desired number of non-zero weights for images and genes. A plot of the 
observed correlation for the set of ten penalty terms tested is shown in Figure 2. We selected c1 = 27.8 and c2 = 3.8 , which gave 
ğ¶ğ‘œğ‘Ÿ ğ‘‹1ğ‘¤1 , ğ‘‹2ğ‘¤2   = 0.95, ğ‘ = 0.03 and resulted in ~1000 non-zero gene weights and ~10 non-zero image feature weights. 

 

4 

 

IIIc. Biological analysis of sets of highly correlated gene expression and image features 
The 9 image features with non-zero weights in Factor 1 were all measurements of stromal density. Functional gene set 
enrichment analysis of the 1318 genes with non-zero weights in Factor 1 shows that the set of genes with non-zero weights (both 
positive and negative) is most enriched for membrane glycoproteins (Bonferroni p = 2E-7). The 10 image features with non-zero 
weights in Factor 2 were descriptors of epithelial nuclear size, shape, and texture. Functional gene set enrichment analysis of the 
1297 genes with non-zero weights in Factor 2 shows that the set of genes with positive weights is highly significantly enriched 
for proteins operating in the stroma/extracellular matrix (Bonferroni p = 1.4E-20) and the set of genes with negative weights is 
highly significantly enriched for proteins that operate in cell cycle regulation (Bonferroni p = 1.9E-14). These findings represent 
the first step to a detailed understanding of the gene expression patterns driving stromal and epithelial morphologic variabi lity in 
breast cancer. The findings from Factor 1 suggest that the expression of membrane glycoproteins may be a regulator of stromal 
density. Analysis of the Factor 2 gene set suggests that the expression of a coherent set of extracellular matrix proteins is 
negatively correlated with the expression of a set of proteins regulating DNA replication. These findings suggest a network of 
epithelial-stromal interactions and provide a candidate list of (likely) epithelial (including: TNFSF13B, PTTG2, CCNB2)  and 
stromal proteins (including: TGFB3, COL3A1, SPON1, SPARC) whose interaction is tightly correlated with nuclear 
morphologic changes. 
 
IIId. Analysis of Patient Survival 
Although we did not supervise our sparse CCA analysis with survival data, it seemed plausible that genes with non-zero weights 
may be mechanistically important drivers of patient survival, as they were chosen due to their high correlation with tumor 
morphologic changes. To assess this hypothesis, as described in the Materials and Methods, we computed an IGS score for each 
patient to summarize the gene and image linear combinations generated by sparse CCA. We stratified patients into three equal-
sized groups based on their IGS score and plotted Kaplan Meier curves, which demonstrated significantly different survival rates 
in the three groups (Log-rank test p = 9E-9) (Figure 3). We fit a Cox proportional-hazards survival model with grade and the 
discretized IGS score and found that both features contributed prognostic information to the model (both p < 0.01).  
 
 
A. Kaplan Meier Survival Curves  
 
B. Cox Multivariate Survival Analysis 

 
Figure 3. Survival analysis. A. Kaplan Meier survival curve of breast cancer cases stratified by IGFS into 3 quantiles. The y 
axis is probability of survival and the x axis is time in years. The Log-rank test compares the equality of the three survival 
functions. The p value indicates that the probability of equality of the three survival functions is 9E-9. B. A multivariate Cox 
proportional hazards survival model was fitted with discretized IGFS and grade, which were both independent predictors of 
 ğ‘–   +   ğ›½ğºğ‘Ÿğ‘ ğ‘‘ ğ‘’ ğ‘¥ğºğ‘Ÿğ‘ğ‘‘ğ‘’
 ğ‘–  
survival in the model. The Cox model takes the form â„ğ‘–  ğ‘¡  =   â„0  ğ‘¡ expâ¡(ğ›½ğ¼ğºğ‘† ğ‘¥ğ¼ğºğ‘†
), where â„ğ‘–  ğ‘¡  represents patient 
i's risk of death at time t,  â„0  ğ‘¡  is the baseline hazard function, and the ğ›½â€²ğ‘  are the coefficients for the covariates in the model[4]. 
Exp(Coef) can be interpreted as multiplicative effects of the covariates on the hazard.  Holding grade constant, an IGS score of 3 
reduces the yearly risk of death by 50% compared to an IGS score of 2. Column Z displays the ratio of each regression 
coefficient to its standard error, which is a Wald statistic. Both IGS and Grade have significant coefficients and their Z's are 

5 

 
associated with low p values. The logrank test p value on the final row indicates the probability of the truth of the null hypothesis 
that all of the Î²'s are zero. This hypothesis is rejected. 
 
IV. Conclusions 
In this paper, we developed methods for computational analysis of tumor morphology and integration of these measurements 
with gene expression data and patient survival data. Using sparse CCA, we identified two factors, each comprised of a set of 
genes highly correlated with a set of image features. The image features in the first factor were entirely stromal, and the image 
features in the second factor were entirely epithelial nuclear. Functional gene set analysis of genes with non-zero weights in 
Factor 1 suggests that membrane glycoproteins may be important regulators of stromal morphology.  Analysis of the Factor 2 
gene set demonstrated that the genes with positive weights were highly significantly enriched for proteins operating in the 
stroma/extracellular matrix, while genes with negative weights were highly significantly enriched for proteins that regulate DNA 
replication/cell cycle. These findings suggest that this set of stromal and cell cycle proteins likely interact in a pathway that 
directly impacts epithelial nuclear morphologic changes. Since the sparse CCA analysis was designed to identify genes and 
image features that were mutually correlated, it seemed likely that these sets of morphologic and molecular changes might be 
mechanistically important and associated with patient survival. To assess the association of the factors identified by sparse CCA 
with outcome, we simply added the linear combinations of the gene and image features from the two factors into a unified score 
(IGS). We found that the IGS was highly associated with patient survival and provided additional prognostic information to 
histological grade. Taken together, our findings suggest that the integration of molecular and morphologic measurements 
represents a promising new strategy for studying breast cancer biology and for identifying sets of genes and image features 
associated with patient outcome. 
 
References: 
A. K. Abbas, R. S. Cotran, N. Fausto, V. Kumar, J. A. Perkins and S. L. Robbins, Robbins and Cotran Pathologic basis of 
[1] 
disease [print/digital], Elsevier/Saunders, Philadelphia, 2005. 
P. O. Brown and D. Botstein, Exploring the new world of the genome with DNA microarrays, Nat Genet, 21 (1999), pp. 
33-7. 
D. R. Cox, Regression models and life-tables, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B (Methodological) (1972), 
pp. 187-220. 
J. Fox, Cox proportional-hazards regression for survival data, An r and splus companion to applied regression (2002). 
S. Gould, R. Fulton and D. Koller, Decomposing a Scene into Geometric and Semantically Consistent Regions, ICCV, 
2009. 
S. Gould, A. Y. Ng and D. Koller, The STAIR Vision Library, 2008. 
S. Gross, Sparse canonical correlation analysis for the integrative analysis of genomic data User guide and technical 
document, Department of Statistics, Stanford University. 
H. Hotelling, Relations between two sets of variates, Biometrika, 28 (1936), pp. 321-377. 
W. Huang da, B. T. Sherman and R. A. Lempicki, Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using DAVID 
bioinformatics resources, Nat Protoc, 4 (2009), pp. 44-57. 
N. Otsu, A threshold selection method from gray-level histograms, Automatica, 11 (1975), pp. 285-296. 
J. Shotton, J. Winn, C. Rother and A. Criminisi, Textonboost: Joint appearance, shape and context modeling for multi-
class object recognition and segmentation, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 3951 (2006), pp. 1. 
R. Tibshirani, Regression shrinkage and selection via the lasso, Journal of the Royal Statistical Society. Series B 
(Methodological), 58 (1996), pp. 267-288. 
[13]  M. J. van de Vijver, Y. D. He, L. J. van't Veer, H. Dai, A. A. Hart, D. W. Voskuil, G. J. Schreiber, J. L. Peterse, C. Roberts, M. 
J. Marton, M. Parrish, D. Atsma, A. Witteveen, A. Glas, L. Delahaye, T. van der Velde, H. Bartelink, S. Rodenhuis, E. T. 
Rutgers, S. H. Friend and R. Bernards, A gene-expression signature as a predictor of survival in breast cancer, N Engl J 
Med, 347 (2002), pp. 1999-2009. 
D. M. Witten, R. Tibshirani and T. Hastie, A penalized matrix decomposition, with applications to sparse principal 
components and canonical correlation analysis, Biostatistics, 10 (2009), pp. 515-34. 
D. M. Witten and R. J. Tibshirani, Extensions of Sparse Canonical Correlation Analysis with Applications to Genomic 
Data, Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular Biology, 8 (2009). 

[10] 
[11] 

[4] 
[5] 

[2] 

[3] 

[6] 
[7] 

[8] 
[9] 

[12] 

[14] 

[15] 

 
 

