MRI Based Machine Learning for Identification of Novel Subtypes in Autism 
Divye Khilnani, Chris Piech, Sudarshan Thitte

 

In 
idiopathic  autism, 
this  study  of  children  with 
multivariate  unsupervised  and  supervised  learning  of 
structural  magnetic  resonance  images  (MRI)  revealed  a 
novel  subtype  of  autism  that  was  characterized  by 
meaningful  grey  matter  anomalies  and  was  predictive  of 
behavioral  outcome.  Given  that  previous  studies  have 
failed  to  identify  neurobiological  subtypes  of  autism  that 
are  clinically  meaningful,  these  findings  underscore  (a) 
the  importance  of  utilizing  machine  learning  algorithms 
to  explore  neurobiological  motifs,  and  (b)  the  potential 
utility  of  brain-based  machine  learning  in  clinical 
practice.  
 

I. INTRODUCTION 
 
AUTISM is currently the fastest growing developmental 
disability  [1].  However,  despite  the  increasing  prevalence 
of  autism,  little  is  known  about  its  causes  or  cures  and 
exploration  into  developmental  prognosis  has  been  stunted 
by  the  low  predictive  validity  of  behavioral  measures  [2]. 
Leshner  et  al,  argue  that  this  contemporary  lack  of 
to 
understanding  stems 
from 
the 
inability 
identify 
biologically  significant  sub  populations 
[3].  Using 
Leshner’s analysis as inspiration the goal of this paper is to 
apply  machine 
learning 
towards  unraveling  new 
neurological based subtypes.  
In  this  analysis  we  cluster  segmented  grey  matter  from 
MRI  scans of 113 boys  ( age = 2.77 years, 2 = 0.63); 63 
diagnosed  with  Autism,  31  typically  developing  (TD) 
controls  and  19  controls  with  idiopathic  developmental 
delay  (DD),  and  examine  if  these  clusters  are  clinically 
meaningful.  Our  approach  to  this  problem  forms  a  natural 
application  for  machine  learning  and  can  be  viewed  as  an 
instance  of  unsupervised  learning  on  high-dimensional, 
noisy  data. The measure  of  success  that we  use  is:  clusters 
that  define  a  subtype  of  Autism  must  (1)  be  robust  and 
quantitatively  distinct,  (2) have  significant  correlation with 
measurable 
behaviors 
and 
(3) 
reflect 
plausible 
neurobiological  patterns  which  are  associated  with  the 
observed behaviors. 
Previous  biologically  based  analysis  of  autism  has 
attempted  to  categorize  the  disorder  through  univariate  or 
coarse  multivariate  brain  regions  and  until  now  has  been 
unable to determine explicit subtypes. The seminal paper in 
this  area  by  Hrdlicka  et  al  amalgamated  the  fine  grey 
matter  MRI 
information 
into 
seven  coarse  brain 
measurements  based  on  strong  a  priori  assumptions  [4]. 
Though  their  results  were  instrumental  in  demonstrating 
the  potential  for  analyzing  structural  MRI,  they  were 
unable  to  deduce meaningful  patterns.    Implementing  their 
methodology on our data set demonstrates subtypes that are 

not  distinct  by  general  measures  and  hold  no  behavioral 
correlations.  Given  autism  has  an 
intricate  neural 
foundation, we hypothesize  that; a coarse feature reduction 
could  hide  information  critical  for  understanding  patterns 
in  autistic  brains.  Based  on  this  hypothesis  we  perform  a 
novel  application  of  unsupervised  learning  methodology 
directly  onto  carefully  preprocessed  high  dimensional  fine 
grey matter volume autistic MRI scans.  
application  produces 
This  unique 
that 
results 
significantly 
industry  standard  of 
improve  on 
the 
behavioral  prognosis  and  reveals  clusters  that  meet  the 
initial subtype criteria.  
 

II. PRE-PROCESSING 

 
We  are  provided  grey  matter  data  derived  from  MRI 
Scans  that  were  mapped  into  a  standard  4mm  voxel  brain 
space  using  modulated  Spatial  Normalization.  Additional 
preprocessing is performed as follows: 
Initially,  we  adjust  our  data  for  age,  scan  site  and  total 
grey  matter  volume.  Values  are  adjusted  by  performing 
linear multiple  regression with  age,  scan  site and  total GM 
volume  as  independent  variables  and  subtracting  the 
calculated residuals from the MRI data.  
Then,  due  to  the  sparse  high  dimensional  nature  of  our 
data we choose to reduce the number of voxels considered. 
We  try  to  eliminate  voxels  based  on  (a)  recursive  feature 
elimination  using  weights  from  a  linear  Support  Vector 
Machine  (SVM)  that  separates  autistic  subjects  from 
controls,  (b)  regression  between  each  voxel  and  temporal 
change  in  behavior  characteristics  and  (c)  an  upper  bound 
selection  of  brains  areas  found  to  be  important  for  autism 
based  on  research  by  Amaral  et  al  [5].    Of  the  feature 
reduction methods  considered,  the Amaral  based  reduction 
produces the best performance improvement. 
Overall  these  preprocessing  steps  result  in  a  higher 
degree  of  uniformity  across  all  subjects  and  reduce  the 
level  of  noise  in  the  data.   This  preprocessing  yields 163% 
improvement  in  cluster  strength  (measured  as  CCC,  refer 
to section III). 
 

III. UNSUPERVISED CLUSTERING 
 
One  of  the  most  crucial  steps  in  this  analysis  is  to 
identify  robust,  quantitatively  distinct  clusters  within  the 
set  of  autistic  patients.  To  obtain  these  clusters  we  apply 
three  separate  unsupervised  techniques  commonly  used  in 
the 
field  of  structural  MRI  analysis:  Hierarchical 
Agglomerative Clustering (HAC), Spectral Clustering (SC) 
and General Mixture Models (GMM).  
 

1. HAC Clustering 
Recently,  Stedman  et  al  demonstrated  the  use  of  HAC 
on  grey  matter  MRI  data  in  order  to  uncover  nuanced 
neural patterns [6]. Given  this precedent, we apply HAC  to 
our dataset. To agglomerate clusters, we use a Ward linkage 
criterion  that  minimizes  the  error  of  sum  squares  with  the 
Euclidean  Squared  Distance  dissimilarity  metric.  In 
contemporary  structural  MRI  and  brain  psychology 
literature,  Euclidean  distance  has  been  demonstrated  to  be 
an  accurate  dissimilarity metric  [7]  and Ward  linkage  is  an 
efficient way to obtain clusters with minimized variance.  
This  method  provides  two  distinct  clusters:  a  larger 
cluster  of  46  autistic  children,  which  we  refer  to  as  the 
Alpha Cluster, and a  smaller cluster of 17 autistic children, 
which  we  refer  to  as  the  Beta  Cluster.  To  objectively 
determine  the  correctness  of  HAC  we  apply  the  HAC 
specific  Cophenetic  Correlation  Coefficient  (CCC)  test 
scaled  from  0  to  1  where  1  represents  the  ideal  CCC  and 
0.5  is  the  threshold  for  considering  a  cluster  to  be 
significant  [8]. The clusters  obtain a CCC  value  of  0.8144, 
which  is  strong  evidence  that  HAC  has  identified  two 
natural clusters.  
To visually demonstrate these results we project clusters 
Alpha  and  Beta  onto  the  primary  principle  components 
(PC)  (see  Figure  1).  While  only  14%  of  the  entire  brain 
matrix  can  be  represented on  three PCs,  the  first  three PCs 
reflect 93% of the variance between the clusters.  

Figure 1: Alpha (red) and Beta (blue) Clusters  

 
2. Spectral Clustering 
As  demonstrated  by  Wassermann  et  al  [9],  SC  is  well-
suited  choice  for  sparse  data  such  as  MRI  scans.  The  SC 
algorithm  uses  the  spectrum  of  the  data  point  similarity 
matrix  to  retain  select  features  that  cause  maximum  intra-
cluster  similarity  and  minimum  inter-cluster  similarity. 
Though  this  method  produces  slightly  different  cluster 

labels,  the  results  are  95%  similar  to  those  obtained  using 
HAC.  
 
3. General Mixture Models 
Another  clustering  method  commonly  used  in  the 
domain  of MRI  scans  is GMM. This method  uncovers  two 
independent  component  distributions  with  high  peaks, 
which  implies  there  are  two  tight  clusters.  The  labels 
obtained  through  GMM  are  identical  to  those  obtained 
from SC and are highly similar to those found using HAC.  
These  three  independent  clustering  methods  obtain 
highly  similar  clusters.  This  supports  the  hypothesis  that 
the  dataset  of  autistic  children  has  two  natural  clusters  and 
that the Alpha and Beta clusters are legitimate.  
 
General Clustering Validation 
Even  though  the clusters appear  to be highly distinct,  to 
consider  them  to  be  formal  subtypes  we  must  show  that: 
(1)  these  clusters  are  numerically  separate  when  measured 
using  general  cluster  tests  and  (2)  they  give  the  same 
results  when  the  input  is  perturbed  by  an  appropriate 
amount  of  noise.  To 
these  criteria  we  use 
test 
Homogeneity-Separation  (HS),  Silhouette,  and  Weighted 
Average  Discrepant  Pairs 
(WADP)  general  cluster 
validation measures. HS measures the ratio of homogeneity 
to  separation  where  separation  is  the  average  Euclidean 
distance  between  clusters  weighted  by  cluster  size. 
Silhouette measures  the  ratio  of  homogeneity  to  separation 
where  separation  for  sample  i  is  the  max  Euclidean 
distance from  i to another sample  j normalized  to  the range 
-1  to  1.  WADP  measures  how  many  cluster  labels  change 
when  each  matrix  feature  is  perturbed  by  normally 
distributed  noise  with  mean  0  and  variance  equal  to  the 
log-ratio  of  that  feature  across  all  samples   [10]. We  repeat 
each  of  the  tests  for  different  number  of  clusters  (k)  to 
confirm  that  the  analysis  should  be  performed  on  two 
clusters.  HS  and  Silhouette  are  maximized  and  WADP 
discrepancy is minimized at k = 2. 
 

Clustering  HS Ratio  Silhouette  WADP 
HAC 
2.14 
0.429 
0.087 
0.293 
0.316 
1.40 
GMM / Spec 

 

Figure 2: General Validation Measures 

We  observe  that  HAC  clustering  outperforms  both 
GMM  and  SC.  Thus  we  continue  subtype  analysis  using 
the  Alpha  and  Beta  clusters.  Moreover,  HAC  performed 
well  on  all  three  validation  tests.  The  high  HS  Ratio  and 
Silhouette  scores  quantitatively  demonstrate 
that 
the 
variance  between  the  Alpha  and  Beta  clusters  is  more 
significant  than  the  variance  within  each  cluster.  The 
WADP  test  shows  that  the  clusters  give  the  same  results 
even with additional noise. 
Finally,  to  confirm  the  validity  of  the  entire  process  we 

-120-100-80-60-40-200204060-1000100-100-80-60-40-20020406080Principle Component 2Autism Clusters Graphed on Principle ComponentsPrinciple Component 1Principle Component 3apply  the  same  pre-process  and  clustering  methodology  to 
a  combined  set  of  control  and  autistic  MRI  scans.  This 
approach  yields  three  clusters  (CCC  of  0.8125);  a  Control 
Cluster,  the Alpha  Cluster  and  the  Beta  Cluster.  Since  the 
preprocessing  steps  used  in  this  paper  and  the  Euclidean 
HAC clustering algorithm  successfully  separate  the control 
brains  from  autistic  brains  we  conclude  that  our  procedure 
is applicable to the domain of autistic MRI scans. 
 
IV. BEHAVIOR CHARACTERIZATION OF CLUSTERS 
 
Our  next  step  is  to  determine  whether  there  are 
meaningful trends between the Alpha and Beta clusters and 
the  behaviors  of  the  corresponding  autistic  children.  For 
each  child,  behavioral  data  was  measured  using  a  set  of 
quantifiable  tests,  which  are  typically  used  to  diagnose  or 
characterize autism. These tests were performed once at the 
time  when  the  structural  MRI  scans  were  taken  (Time 
Initial  tests  denoted T0)  and  again  after  two  to  three  years. 
Our  longitudinal  tests  are  performed  on  the  variability 
measured  as  change  in  score  per  year  (Slope  tests   denoted 
∆)  to  account  for  inconsistency  in  how much  time  elapsed 
between  the  two  tests  for  each  patient .  In  order  to  explore 
possible  trends,  we  apply  univariate,  linear  multivariate 
and  kernalized  multivariate  analysis  between  the  Alpha-
Beta group labels and the T0 and ∆ tests. 
 
Univariate Analysis 
First  we  run  Welsh’s  Null  Hypothesis  univariate  tests 
(WNH),  a  version  of  the  standard  T-Test  that  accounts  for 
different  sample  sizes,  on  the  behavior  characteristics  of 
the Alpha  and Beta  subgroups. For  each  set  of  scores  for  a 
behavior,  b  such  that 
  we  split  the  scores  by 
their Alpha  and  Beta  labels.  We  then  run  NHT  to  test  the 
hypothesis  that  the  two  sets of  scores are  samples from  the 
same Gaussian distribution against  the hypothesis that  they 
are  samples  from  separate  Gaussians.  The  general 
threshold  for  discarding  the  null  hypothesis  is  a  p  value  of 
0.05.  
Of  the  behavioral  tests,  the  ADI  Repetitive  and 
Stereotyped  Behavior  (ADI_RS)  test  and  the  ADOS 
Stereotyped  (ADOS_S)  test,  two  distinct  measures  of  a 
child’s repetitive physical behavior of Autism, such as hand 
flapping  and  body  rocking  (referred  to  by Amaral  et  al  as 
Repetitive  Behaviors),  pass  the  NHT  with  significance 
measures  of  p  =  0.0030  and  p  =  0.034  respectively. 
However  to  take  into  account  the  probability  of  false 
positives  given  multiple  tests,  we  apply  the  Bonferroni 
Correction  [11],  resulting  in  a  stringent  p  threshold  of 
0.0033.  Since  the  significance  level  of  ADI_RS  test  is 
below the Bonferroni threshold, it is exceedingly likely that 
the ADI_RS  distinction  (Figure  3)  is  a  strong Alpha  Beta 
correlation. Another  interesting  observation  is  that  in  both 

the ADI_RS and ADOS_S  slope behavior  tests,  the autistic 
children  in  the  Beta  cluster  had  positive  mean  values 
(ADI_RS  = 0.51) while the autistic children in  the Alpha 
cluster had negative mean values (ADI_RS  = -0.89). This 
suggests  that  the  Repetitive  symptoms  of  Alpha  group 
improved over time whereas the repetitive symptoms of the 
Beta group worsened.  

 

 

Figure 3: ADI_RS test showing the Alpha distribution (red) and 
Beta distribution (blue) 

This  is  a  highly  noteworthy  result  as  it  shows  that  the 
two  natural  clusters  uncovered  have  a  strong  univariate 
longitudinal behavioral trend.  
 
Multivariate Analysis 
In  order  to  determine  how well  our  labels  could  predict 
a  collection  of  behaviors, we perform multivariate analysis 
between  the  discovered  groups  and  the  recorded  behavior 
scores.  This  experiment  was  implemented  using  a  SVM 
classifier  with  a  linear  kernel  between  the  Alpha  Beta 
cluster  labels  and both  the T0 and ∆ behaviors. To measure 
how  well  the  SVM  could  separate  behavior  trends  with 
respect  to  each  cluster,  we  use  leave-one-out  cross 
validation 
(LOOCV) 
to  calculate  accuracy 
(ACC), 
sensitivity  (SEN),  specificity  (SPE),  positive  predictive 
value (PPV) and negative predictive value (NPV). 
To  understand  how  our  results  compare  to  chance  we 
apply  a  Permutation  Analysis 
(PA)  algorithm 
that 
calculates  the mean  (µ)  and  standard  deviation  ()  of  each 
metric  (under 
the  assumption 
that 
the  metrics  are 
distributed  normally)  and  use  the  resulting  distribution  to 
homogenize  our  results.  In  order  to  evaluate 
  and 
 
such  that 
  we  repeat  the  following  process 
until 
  and 
  converge:  (1)  assign  random  cluster  labels 
in  proportion  to  each  subject,  (2)  evaluate  how  an  SVM 
performs,  measured  by  metric  I  (3)  update 
  and 
  to 
incorporate the results. 
 
 

bUT0iiimetricsiiii-2.5-2-1.5-1-0.500.511.5200.10.20.30.40.5scorepStereotypical Autism T-TestMetric  Slope  Time Initial 
83.5 
92.5 
ACC 
74.4 
64.3 
SEN 
84.1 
96.6 
SPE 
PPV 
83.4 
80.2 
77.8 
80.8 
NPV 

Figure 4: Behavior SVM Metric Percentiles 

Using  the SVM with clusters Alpha and Beta we  obtain 
the above LOOCV results (Figure 4). 
Since  all  the  LOOCV  metrics  are  substantially  above 
chance  (50th  percentile)  these  results  imply  that  there  is  a 
robust  behavioral  distinction  (both  in  T0  and  ∆)  between 
the  Alpha  and  Beta  subgroups  and  demonstrates  that  the 
two  clusters  have  behavioral  manifestations.  Moreover, 
though  the  Alpha  and  Beta  clusters  perform  well  at 
separating  T0,  the  clusters  are  substantially  better  at 
distinguishing  ∆  measures;  meaning  that  the  Alpha  Beta 
distinction is more precise at predicting future behavior.  
Because  the  behavior  matrices  are  normalized,  the 
weights used by  the SVM  represent how  important each of 
the  behavior  tests  are  in  separating  the  Alpha  and  Beta 
clusters. 
 

Behavior Test 
ADI Repetitive and Stereotyped 
ADOS Stereotyped 

Slope Weights 
1.315 
0.806 

 

Behavior Test 
ADI Repetitive and Stereotyped 
Vineland Communication 

Time Initial 
1.313 
-0.963 

Figure 5: Behavior SVM Weights for Slope and Time Initial 

The  behavior-test weights  in  Figure  5  are  important  for 
three  reasons  (1)  The  most  substantial  differences  in  the 
weights,  especially  for  ∆,  are  from  tests  which  measured 
Repetitive  and  Stereotyped  behaviors  (2)  The  parities  for 
the  Repetitive  behavior  tests  are  internally  consistent  in 
denoting  that autistic children  in  the Beta group have more 
severe  symptoms  and  (3)  as  expected,  the  weighted 
features  agree  with  the  univariate  analysis.  Overall,  this 
demonstrates  a  meaningful  pattern  in  behaviors  and  as  a 
result  provides  powerful  evidence  for  the  hypothesis  that 
the  Alpha  and  Beta  clusters  represent  different  subgroups 
of Autism. 
 
Kernalized Multivariate Analysis 
To  account  for  potential  non-linear  relationships 
between  behavior  and  the  Alpha  and  Beta  clusters,  we 
perform  multivariate  analysis  using  different  kernels.  As  
Figure 6 demonstrates, the linear kernel out-performs other 
kernels.  
Since  the  non-linear  kernels  have  high  LOOCV  testing 
error  with  relatively  low  training  error ,  it  seems  that  the 

non-linear  kernels  over-fit  the  data.  This  conclusion  is 
reasonable,  considering  the  small  training  set  size  relative 
to number of features used to train the SVM.   
 
Metric  Linear  Quadratic  Radial Basis  Polynomial 
ACC 
92.5 
48.8 
61.8 
62.3 
93.9 
39.7 
36.7 
64.3 
SEN 
41.1 
68.0 
57.0 
96.6 
SPE 
PPV 
83.4 
38.7 
50.0 
72.8 
78.6 
51.4 
43.1 
80.8 
NPV 

Figure 6: Kernalized SVM Metrics 

V. BRAIN ANALYSIS 

 

The  final  step  in  our  subtype  analysis  is  to  examine  the 
structural  MRI  differences  between  the  Alpha  and  Beta 
clusters. In order to quantify the grey matter differences we 
use  three  different methods:  (1) We  calculate  the  centroids 
of  the  two  clusters  and  find  the  difference  vector  between 
them,  (2) We  use  the  primal  Eigen-brain,  since  92%  of  the 
variance  between  the  two  clusters  is  expressed  by  the  first 
principle  component,  and  (3)  We  train  a  SVM  to  label 
brains  as  either Alpha or Beta and extract  the weights used 
by  this  SVM.  For  each  of  the  vectors  obtained  we 
reconstruct  average  grey  matter  brain  images  by  reversing 
the normalization stages of our preprocessing pipeline. 
The  brains  representative  of  the  difference  between  the 
Alpha  and  Beta  clusters  (figure  7)  show  several  important 
patterns. The most prominent and consistent difference that 
emerges  from  these  brains  is  the  grey  matter  difference  in 
the Thalamus  region  (the  lower  lobes of  the Diencephalon, 
in  the  center  of  the  brain).  Across  all  three  methods  of 
viewing  the  differences  between  clusters,  the  Beta  cluster 
has  significantly  less  grey  matter  in  the  core  of  the 
Thalamus. Furthermore,  in both  the centroid and PC brains 
the Alpha and Beta clusters are distinguished by amount of 
grey  matter  in  the  Orbitofrontal  Cortex  (The  large  red 
activation  above  the  nose)  and  the  Medial  Prefrontal 
Cortex  (The  thin  red  strip  in  front  of  the  Thalamus). 
Moreover, 
the  Alpha  and  Beta  clusters  also  show 
substantial  grey  matter  volume  differences  in  the  posterior 
Vermis  of  the  Cerebellum  (the  lower  region  of  the 
Cerebellum) and in the Caudate region.  
According  to  Amaral,  two  of  the  four  most  important 
regions  of  the  brain  for  determining  Repetitive  and 
Stereotypical  Behavior  characteristics  of  autism  are  the 
thalamus  and  the  frontal  cortex  [5].  Moreover,  other 
research  has  hypothesized  that  Repetitive  Behaviors  can 
also be attributed to the Vermis and the Caudate [12]. 
Finally  the  Alpha  and  Beta  clusters  also  demonstrate 
differences in the hippocampus (small blue region  behind  

 

 

Figure 7: Grey Matter differences measured by centroid difference (top), PCA (middle) and SVM weights (bottom)  

the  Orbitofrontal  cortex).  Though  this  region  has  not  been 
noted  as  deterministic  for  Repetitive  behaviors  it  is 
considered to be highly significant for Autism in general. 
Thus,  the  regions  of  the  brain with  the  largest  observed 
differences  between  the Alpha  and  Beta  group  correspond 
to  regions  that  are  thought  to  cause  the  behaviors  these 
clusters  predicted.  This  provides  strong  reinforcement 
towards  the  hypothesis  that  the  Alpha  and  Beta  clusters 
represent  meaningful  subtypes  of  Autism.    Furthermore, 
while  different 
regions  have 
been 
hypothesized 
individually  to  cause  repetitive  behaviors  the  differences 
between  the Alpha  and  Beta  clusters  could  lead  to  further 
insight  on  how  their  combinations  affect  Repetitive 
Behaviors in autistic children.  
 

VI. CONCLUSION 
 
In  the  hopes  of  facilitating  future  diagnosis  our  project 
culminated  in  the  development  of  an  autism  sub-type 
classification  tool.  The  classification  tool  uses  SVM  to 
identify  whether  a  patient  suffers  from  Beta  autism  or  not 
and  can  make  inferences  regarding  future  undesirable 
behavioral  characteristics  that  the  child  may  suffer  from, 
based on this classification.   
Overall  this  project  provides  strong  evidence  that  the 
Beta  cluster 
is  a  valid  subtype  of  autism 
that 
is 
characterized  by  repetitive  behaviors.  Given  the  possible 
applications  of  discovering  a  new  autism  subtype,  this 
finding  suggests  that  more  exploration  should  be  done  to 
cement understanding of Beta Cluster autism. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This  project  was  undertaken  with  the  guidance  of 
Fumiko Hoeft. She made  the data available  to us, and gave 
us  support  and  advice  throughout  the  project.  We  would 
also like to thank Catie Chang for her valuable suggestions. 

Finally we worked  in collaboration with Joseph Huang and 
Anand Iyer and we  look forward to  extending  this research 
with them. 
 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
 
[1]  James  Rimmer,  David  Braddock,  Kenneth  Pitetti  – 
“Research On  Physical Activity And Disability: An  Emerging 
National Priority” (1996). 
[2]  Tony  Charman,  Emma  Taylor,  Auriol  Drew,  Helen 
Cockerill,  Jo-Anne  Brown,  and  Gillian  Baird  –  “Outcome  of 
Children  Diagnosed  with  Autism  at  Age  2:  Predictive 
Validity” (2005) 
[3] Altevogt  BM,  Hanson  SL,  Leshner AI  –  “Autism  and  the 
environment:  challenges  and  opportunities  for      research” 
(2008).  
[4]  Hrdlicka  M,  Dudova  I,  Beranova  I,  Lisy  J,  Belsan  T, 
Neuwirth  J,  Komarek  V,  Faladova  L,  Havlovicova  M, 
Sedlacek  Z,  Blatny  M,  Urbanek  T  -  “Subtypes  of  autism  by 
cluster analysis based on structural MRI data” (2005). 
[5]  Amaral  DG,  Schumann  CM,  Nordahl  CW 
“Neuroanatomy of Autism” (2008).  
[6] J.D. Stedman and N.M. Spyrou – “Hierarchical clustering 
into  groups  of  human  brain  regions  according  to  elemental 
composition” (1998). 
[7]  Laurent  Itti,  Linda  Chang,  and  Thomas  Ernst  – 
“Automatic Scan Prescription for Brain MRI” (2001). 
[8]  Sokal,  R.  R.  and  Rohlf  F.  J.  –  “The  comparison  of 
dendrograms by objective methods” (1962). 
 
                
[9]  Demian  Wassermann,  Maxime  Descoteaux  and  Rachid 
Deriche  –  “Recovering  cerebral  white  matter  structures  with 
Spectral Clustering of Diffusion MRI Data” (2007). 
[10] Amy V. Kapp and Robert Tibshirani - “Are clusters found 
in one dataset present in another dataset?” (2006). 
[11] Hervé Abdi – “The Bonferonni and Šidák  
Corrections for Multiple Comparisons” (2007). 
[12] L. Sears, C. Vest, S. Mohamed, J. Bailey and B. Ranson -  
“An MRI study of the basal ganglia in autism” (1999).  

- 

