Favorites-Based Search Result Ordering

Ben Flamm and Georey Schiebinger

CS 229 Fall 2009

1 Introduction

Search engine rankings can often benet from knowledge of users' interests. The query  jaguar , for example,
has dierent meaning for a British car enthusiast than for a Paraguayan park ranger. Here we implemented
a naïve Bayes classier and a cosine-angle similarity metric to sort a set of documents by their relevance to
a  bookbag of user-selected documents. Moreover, we demonstrated that combining the outputs of these
algorithms with a support vector machine produces a better estimate of user-relevance than either algorithm
does individually.
We used the UCSF Legacy Tobacco Documents Library as our source of documents[1]. This online
library contains more than 10 million documents released as a result of federal lawsuits against the tobacco
industry.
In an eort to overwhelm the library and its users, the tobacco companies ooded the library
with millions of documents, including folder covers, blank pages, and duplicate documents. Researchers are
therefore presented with the problem of sifting through a vast number of  junk documents to nd references
that are suitable to their particular research topic. Since this library is used by many researchers, and is
growing daily, adding relevance-based search result ordering will allow the users to more easily discover useful
documents.

2 Data Acquisition and Feature Selection

Our rst step in acquiring data was to generate  bookbags, or lists of user-selected documents with which
we will order the search results. We extracted three sample bookbags from the references of research papers
that cited documents from the Legacy library[3, 4, 5]. We also selected 1000 random documents from the
library to estimate the baseline word frequencies of the library. We call the bookbags B1 , B2 , B3 and the set
of random documents R.
For each document, we retrieved the PDF version from the Legacy website, stripped the text from the
PDF, and generated a list of tokens using the Porter stemming algorithm.
We then combined the token lists for all of the documents, and found the token frequency distribution.
We selected the medium frequency tokens as our working set[6], eliminating tokens occurring less than 12
times and more than 2000 times total over the 1500 documents. We constructed a document frequency
matrix, D, whose ij th entry is the frequency of word j in document i.

3 Algorithms

Our goal is to provide the user with documents relevant to their interests. To this end, we assign each
document si , from a set of search results S , a relevance score d(si , ˆB ). We compute this score with the aid
of a bookbag B , a set of documents that are relevant to the user. We observe (i.e. train on) a portion of
the bookbag, ˆB ⊂ B , and random documents, ˆR ⊂ R. We train a naïve Bayes classier and vector space
classier on these sets, and generate relevance scores dN B (si , ˆB ) and dV S (si , ˆB ) for each document si in the
held-out documents. In our testing, we sorted the documents via an optimal linear combination of these two
metrics, which we computed with a support vector machine.

1

3.1 Naïve Bayes Classier

We implemented a naïve Bayes classier using the multinomial event model and Laplace smoothing. Our
training set consisted of positive examples ˆB drawn from the bookbag B and  negative examples ˆR drawn
from a set of random documents R (representative of the baseline word frequency of the library). For a
document si ∈ S and a training collection of relevant documents ˆB , we dened the naïve Bayes relevance
[the log probability that the document is in class 0 (not in ˆB )] to [the log
parameter as the ratio of:
probability that the document is in class 1 (in ˆB )]. I.e.

dN B (si , ˆB ) ≡ log P (si = 0)
log P (si = 1)

Note that the more relevant documents have smaller dN B values. This technique is called the Probability
Ranking Principle (PRP). This ranking method is optimal in the sense that it minimizes the expected loss
at k, where the loss at k is dened as the number of documents bi ∈ B that are not ranked in the top k
positions. A proof of this fact can be found in [2].

3.2 Vector Space Classier

(cid:107)d1 (cid:107)(cid:107)d2 (cid:107) , where (cid:107)d(cid:107) = (cid:0)(cid:80)
(cid:1) 1
For our next classier, we treated each document as a vector in a high-dimensional vector space and used
the cosine of the angle between two document vectors as a pair-wise document similarity metric. That is,
dT
1 d2
i d2
2 is the Euclidean norm of d.
for document vectors d1 , d2 we computed
i
For this vector space classier, unlike for the naïve Bayes classifer, we used a term frequency-inverse
document frequency (tf-idf ) normalization scheme for the token frequency matrix, as suggested in [6]. The
term frequency is simply the number of times a token appears in a document. The inverse document frequency
is the log of 1/[the fraction of documents the term appears in]. The two weightings play opposite roles:
term frequency rewards tokens that occur more often in an individual document, while inverse document
frequency down-weights tokens common across many documents, which likely play little role in determining
(cid:18) M
(cid:19)
the document's relevance. To generate the tf-idf weight, we multiply the tf and idf weights for each token.
The ijth entry of D is then
Dij = nij × log
that word j appears in: mj = (cid:80)
i 1{nij > 0}, and M is the total number of documents: M = (cid:80)
mj
where nij is the number of times that word j appears in document i, mj is the number of documents
j mj .
Now, given two sets of documents ˆB and S , for each si in S we dene the vector space relevance parameter
(cid:88)
dV S (si , ˆB ) as the mean pair-wise document similarity over the elements of ˆB :
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)
dV S (si , ˆB ) ≡ 1(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ˆB
bi∈ ˆB
3.3 SVM Combination of Naïve Bayes and Vector Space Scores

bT
i si
(cid:107)bi(cid:107) (cid:107)si(cid:107)

After computing the naïve Bayes (probabilistic) and vector space (non-probabilistic) scores, we seek the
optimal linear combination of the two. For each document bi in ˆB we calculated the naïve Bayes and vector
space parameters dN B (bi , ˆB/bi ) and dV S (bi , ˆB/bi ). We did the same for each document ri in ˆR. Then we
used sequential minimal optimization (SMO) to nd the optimal margin classier separating the documents
in ˆB from the documents in ˆR in this two dimensional space (see gure 1, below).
One advantage of this SVM combo algorithm is that it can be used to combine any number of ranking
metrics. Here we demonstrated its use with two common ranking algorithms, but one could easily imagine
adding other ranking metrics such as the mean KL divergence from the documents in ˆB , or the minimum
vector space distance to ˆB instead of the mean, etc.

2

Figure 1. Above are the results of training on 30 documents from B2 (the green set) and 500 documents
from R (blue). We then tested on 50 documents from B1 (red), 20 from B2 (green), 240 from B3 (yellow)
and 400 from R (blue). On the left is a 2D scatterplot of the documents in NB-VS score space. Each x
represents a document in the training set and each dot represents a document in the test set. The value on
the x-axis is dV S and the y-axis is dN B . If we were to draw an imaginary horizontal line at y=.7 and ascend
vertically, picking points as we meet them, this would amount to ranking the documents by the naïve Bayes
parameter. Similarly, if we were to draw an imaginary vertical line at x=.3 and sweep left, this would rank
the documents by their vector space score. The dotted diagonal line shows the optimal linear combination
of the two parameters, calculated with a SVM as discussed in section 3. The gure on the right shows the
functional margin of each point. Note the clear separation of the green documents from the rest, which
shows that we separate one set of bookbag documents from both random documents and documents from
other bookbags.

4 Results

We tested our naïve Bayes, vector space, and SVM combination classiers on three bookbags of varying sizes,
B1 , B2 , B3 . The rst set had 69 documents, the second 51, and the third had roughly 1100. Our methods
generated favorable results, particularly for the SVM combination classier, which regularly returned more
than half of the held-out bookbag documents at the top of the ordered results. Below we discuss the results
for each method, examine learning curves for the various methods, and note several issues we encountered.

Precision Recall Curve

From the ordered results returned by each algorithm, we generated precision-recall curves.

3

Figure 2. The precision recall plot for the test described in gure 1. Our precision is 1 when our recall
is .5, meaning that the rst 10 returned documents are all true bookbag documents. Similarly, since our
precision is .75 when our recall is 1, all of our 20 bookbag documents are in the top 27 search results.

Learning curves

We generated learning curves by training each method on a varying number of documents, testing on a xed
number of documents, and computing the area under the precision-recall curves.

(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) ˆB
(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12). The y-axis is the area under the precision-recall curve.
Figure 3. Learning curves for dierent classiers. The x-axis is the number of positive bookbag training
examples, or
We notice several things in these learning curves. First, the SVM combination is better than either the
naïve Bayes or vector space classiers individually, ignoring slight noise issues for the medium-size bookbag.
Second, the learning curve values increase only slightly as the positive training example size increases. This
is a good sign, indicating that even if users specify few documents, the classier returns relevant results.
Third, the results for B3 are much worse than the results for B1 or B2 . This is probably because B3 is a
much larger collection of documents and has a greater variety of topics. Our algorithm does best with fewer
topics in a bookbag (see below). It also could be that the random examples that received high relevance
scores (see gure 1, for example) were actually relevant documents.

5 Conclusions and future work

We see that our SVM combination classier does a good job of returning held-out results for the compact,
single-topic bookbags B1 and B2 . Our algorithm has the advantage of being independent of the size of the

4

document library (~10 million documents). However, the algorithm does not handle multiple bookbag topics
very well, so we naturally cast our collective eye towards more sophisticated methods.
There are a number of algorithms that address these issues that we considered but did not implement due
to time constraints. One simple solution, for example, would be to try running K-means clustering (using
the cosine angle distance metric) on the document library to uncover about 300-500 clusters. One could then
assign high relevance scores to the search results that clustered with the bookbag documents.
Another approach would be to try Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI), i.e. to do a singular value decom-
position on the (very large) document frequency matrix, D , representing all the documents in the library.
To our knowledge, LSI has not been done on such a large dataset before. However, it might be possible
to compute the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix DT D ∈ R|V |×|V | (where |V | is the size of the
vocabulary). The eigenvectors of DT D are the right singular vectors of D , and multiplication by D gives
the left singular vectors (scaled by the singular value). We can then form a low-rank approximation of D .
This way of conducting LSI is independent of the size of the document library.
Yet another approach would be to run Latent Dirichlet Allocation (LDA) on the entire library (or a large
representative subset) to represent each document as a mixture of latent topics, and then rank the search
results according to how many topics they shared with the bookbag documents.
It would also be interesting to tinker with ways to test and improve the feature vector. This might involve
more aggressively testing the eect of changing the lower and upper cutos on token frequency. We could
also use n-tuples of letters or words as tokens. The problem with this is that the documents in the Legacy
library have been OCRed, which injects a lot of noise into the data, were we to look at these features. We
also did not include metadata such as author, publication date, or document title. This would likely be a
straightforward addition to our SVM combination classier.
Favorites-based search result ordering has applications beyond the Legacy Tobacco Documents Library.
We believe this algorithm can be used to rank results for web search based on user preferences, in a manner
similar to Amazon.com's related product display.

References

[1] Legacy Tobacco Document Library. http://legacy.library.ucsf.edu/

[2] Ripley, B. D. 1996. Pattern Recognition and Neural Networks. Cambridge University Press.

[3] Cortese DK, Lewis MJ, Ling PM. Tobacco Industry Lifestyle Magazines Targeted to Young Adults. Jour-
nal of Adolescent Health 2009 Sep. 45(3):268-280. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2009.02.008.

[4] Campbell RB, Balbach ED. Building Alliances in Unlikely Places: Progressive Allies and the Tobacco
Institute's Coalition Strategy on Cigarette Excise Taxes. Am J Public Health 2009 Jul;99(7):1188-1196.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2008.143131

[5] Proctor RN, The Golden Holocaust, unpublished manuscript

[6] Manning CD, Raghavan, P, Schütze H, Introduction to Information Retrieval, Cambridge University
Press. 2008. http://nlp.stanford.edu/IR-book/pdf/irbookonlinereading.pdf. Ch. 5,6

5

