Structural motif detection in high-throughput structural probing of
RNA molecules

Diego Mu˜noz Medina, Sergio Pablo S´anchez Cordero

December 11, 2009

Abstract
In recent years, the advances in structural probing in RNAs have led to the development of high through-
put experiments that generate vast amounts of data that is not feasible to curate manually. Analogous to
the case of high-throughput genome sequencing, there is a need to analyze the structural results via com-
putational methods. In this pro ject, we propose an algorithm based on support vector machines (SVMs)
to ﬁnd structural motifs in data produced by an avant-garde method for RNA structural probing known as
RNA tapestries. In this experimental method, every base of a speciﬁc RNA molecule is mutated iteratively,
one by one, producing N number of mutants (where N is the length of the RNA, in nucleotides). Each
mutant is then modiﬁed using diﬀerent chemical treatments, such as DMS, CMCT, and SHAPE[3, 1]. The
modiﬁcation of the molecule occurs in sites where the RNA is unstructured (such as hairpins and loops
for SHAPE chemical footprinting) or in speciﬁc base types (adenosine and cytosine for DMS, and guanine
and uridine for CMCT), thereby, giving a strong fragment signal during reverse transcription check by gel
electrophoresis. The ﬁnal array of the modiﬁed mutants is given in form of a matrix T , where each entry,
T (i, j ), is the signal strength of the ith nucleotide of the molecule in the j th mutant. Careful analysis of T
may allow the recognition of patterns that are helpful in determining the structure of the RNA in question.

1 RNA Tapestries

Structural probing of RNAs by means of chemical modiﬁcation is a quick and powerful way to determine
important contacts of the RNA molecule in question. The main idea behind these methods is to induce RNA
modiﬁcations using diﬀerent chemical treatments. Modiﬁcation of the molecule occurs as methylathion of
unpaired nucleotides (for DMS and CMCT) or as backbone conformational changes in regions where it is not
structured (for SHAPE analysis). The resulting RNA molecule is then reverse transcribed, which results in
the production of fragments of DNA that stop at the modiﬁed sites and that can be subsequently analyzed
and compared using standard gel electrophoresis techniques. The information given by these methods can be
complemented by inﬂicting nucleotide mutations to the RNA and repeating the chemical footprinting analysis.
Positions of the RNA that are modiﬁed after the mutations indicate strong structural dependence on the
nucleotides near those locations. This technique can be further extended by repeating the process for many
mutants and aligning the resulting signals to perform a comparative analysis between mutation eﬀects on the
RNA structure. Simple patterns, such as those describing stems, can be easily visualized and annotated by
hand, but this is a time consuming and error prone process. Furthermore, more complex interactions (such as
tertiary contacts) are not readily apparent and may be diﬃcult to spot.

2 Methods

We demonstrate the use of SVMs with l1 regularization to detect structural motifs in RNA tapestries, using
tapestry data from the medloop RNA motif, the signal recognition particle motif (SRPH8), tRNA Phe, and the
Sarcin loop motif RNAs. These RNAs have well-known structures and can therefore be used as a training set
for our SVM implementation.

2.1 Pre-processing the data

Since comparison of various RNA tapestries can be noisy(due to the variance in the strength of the chemical
signal in each experiment), we compute global z-scores for each entry in the tapestries. When classifying a new
RNA given its tapestry, we adjust the entries to global z-scores as well. Furthermore, since the experimental
data contained chemical footprinting for the RNA sequence of interest plus primer sequences at its ends, we had
to carefully locate the tapestry region that mapped to the RNA molecule in question and discard the primer
sequences’ data. This was done by standard methods that align the chemical footprinting data for each mutant
(taking into account signal intensities and signal position in the sequence).

1

Figure 1: Deﬁning the feature vector: An RNA tapestry as a heat map (left). We focus on the four corner
boxes as well as the central box for each base pair. The central box is crucial for obtaining good results.

2.2 Building the training set
First, let us deﬁne what an RNA tapestry is. An RNA tapestry is a n × n real-valued matrix T such that its
kth column contains the chemical footprint data given by the chemical footprinting protocol when mutating a
single nucleotide in the wild type RNA. The mutation is speciﬁed on a separate label vector L, that contains
the index of the nucleotide modiﬁed and the base to which is was mutated. By deﬁnition, the ﬁrst column of
T contains the chemical footprint information of the wild type RNA, with no mutations. We use a pairwise
criterion to build the training set, that is, for each pair of nucleotides i and j (given by their respective index
in the RNA sequence), we will see if they interact in some manner (i.e.
form a base pair). To do this, we
will focus on a vecinity in the matrix T around the centers: T (i, i), T (i, j ), T (j, i) and T (j, j ).
In other
words, given a neiborhood parameter , we will look on the entries T (k , l) where k and l are integers such that
k , l ∈ ([i − , i + ] ∪ [j − , j + ]) ∩ ([0, n]). This follows the intuition that when mutating a nucleotide in a certain
position, there will occur structural rearrangements in its vicinity that will be expressed as a particular signal
in the tapestry. In this way, we focus our attention only in the ”‘boxes” centered at T (i, j ), T (j, i), T (i, i) and
T (j, j ), with side size 2 + 1. Furthermore, if perturbating two positions separately result in a signiﬁcant signal
change in both positions then there is some evidence to believe that the nucleotides in those positions interact
in some way. Our ob jective is to implement a SVM that is capable of predicting what changes in the chemical
signal correlate with a physical interaction between the bases. Thus, we use all of the entries T (k , l) as features
to build our training set. In order to account for the the rest of the entries in the row k and l, we take the set
B of all ”background” entries T (k (cid:48) , l(cid:48) ) that lie in the rows i and j , but not in F , and obtain their mean and
standard deviation. Finally, we append to each feature vector integer labels of the bases that were mutated.
In this way, we can convert the tapestry T into n2 feature vectors that give the pairwise tapestry information
of the nucleotides in the RNA. The category of each feature vector is -1 if the respective bases i and j do not
interact and 1 if they do. We repeat this process for each RNA tapestry that was include in the training set.

2.3 Tweaking the SVM parameters and reducing training set size by random
sampling

We tried diﬀerent parameters for our SVM and compared their performance. We varied the C trade-oﬀ pa-
rameter, tried linear, 2nd to 5th degree polynomials, gaussian kernels, and varied the  vicinity value described
above. We also varied the constraints on the condition wT x + b ≥ 0 to be wT x + b ≥ γ to reduce the number of
negative predictions. This last parameter is motivated by the small amounts of positive examples in our training
set (from the n2 possible base interactions, only a small fraction of them actually occur1 ). This observation
also allowed us to reduce the training set size by performing random sampling of the negative training examples
(this was done by discarding a negative training example with a certain probability which, in our case, was 0.6).
Fortunately, this did not alter our results in any way and signiﬁcantly reduced the complexity of the training

1 If we are only considering secondary structure, the number of interactions is of order O(n). This result derives from the fact
that in secondary structure interactions a nucleotide can interact with at most one other nucleotide.

2

Figure 2: SVM parameters: Leave one out precisions of various SVM parameters: C trade-oﬀ parameter (blue),
−γ (green) and the neighborhood size  (red). For comparison purposes, we ﬁt γ from 0 to 5 for the ﬁgure’s
scale, although it was actually taken from 0 to -10. The precision given is before applying the ﬁlter.

set. We analyzed the performance of the SVM varying one parameter at a time (ﬁrst the C parameter, followed
by the kernel type, γ and, ﬁnally, ). For each parameter value, we performed a cross validation similar to leave
one out, but leaving out a complete set of vectors corresponding to a particular RNA in each trial.

2.4 Prediction ﬁltering

Since only a small set of RNAs was available and due to the noisy nature of the data, we designed a method
to ﬁlter the resulting predictions. First, we scored each possible base pair Bp(i, j ), formed by the nucleotides
positioned in i and j in the RNA sequence and where Bp is the base pair matrix of all possible base pairs. This
was done in the following manner:
• Start by deﬁning S core(i, j ) = 0.
• If i and j are within a vicinity δ in Bp of a base pair interaction predicted by the SVM, then set
S core(i, j ) := S core(i, j ) + 2.
• If Bp(i, j ) is a predicted base pair interaction but Bp(j, i) is not, then set S core(i, j ) := S core(i, j ) − 1.
• If Bp(i, j ) is a Watson-Crick base pair (AU,GC) or a GU base pair, then set S core(i, j ) := S core(i, j ) + 1.
• Deﬁne the stem bonus S b(i, j ) as the iterative sum of the positive scores in the diagonals starting at
Bp(i − 1, j + 1) and Bp(i + 1, j − 1), stopping when a score of zero is encountered. Intuitively, these bonus
corresponds to scoring a possible stem from which BP (i, j ) is a part of.

To ﬁlter the base pairs, we partitioned each column of the base pair matrix into m intervals. For each interval in
each column, we discarded all of the predicted base pairs except the one with the highest S core(i, j ) + S b(i, j ).
As the parameter m increases, our ﬁlter acts in a more selective manner, conserving fewer positive predictions.
The case where m equals the sequence length allows only one prediction pair column, which allows at most one
base interaction per nucleotide. This property aligns perfectly with the deﬁnition of the secondary structure,
and we were pleased to ﬁnd that, in the case of SRPH8, we could predict the full secondary structure setting
m to be the length of the sequence.

3 Results

Given a full set of vectors that describe an RNA molecule, and following our previous deﬁnitions for posi-
tive/negative training examples and predictions, we expected to see only a small number of positive predictions.
At ﬁrst, our SVM greedily gave a negative prediction for every base pair. Indeed, given the nature of the testing
set, this gave a spectacular error of less than 3% in most cases, but with horribly low precisions. We tried
to include more positive predictions by decreasing the parameter γ , but still got poor results. Since we were

3

Figure 3: SVM base interaction predictions on the SRPH8 motif (right) and the correct secondary structure
(left). After applying our ﬁlter, we can get the correct secondary structure.

constantly observing inconsistencies in the way that the training precision, testing precision, recall, and error
were varying given increases in the training set size, our next approach was to include more features.

3.1 Adding the central box

After numerous failed attempts to improve our training and testing precisions by changing the SVMs parameters,
we ﬁnally decided to include more features in our feature vector. Since we had observed that most structural
motifs in the tapestries were visually manifested in the form of ”‘X”’s, we decided that it was not suﬃcient to
focus on the boxes centered in the combined coordinates of each possible base pair. Therefore, we would also
have to consider the changes ocurring in the middle of the region deﬁned by the corners T (i, i),T (i, j ),T (j, i),
2 (cid:101), j + (cid:100) j−i
2 (cid:101)), whose size was also deﬁned by
and T (j, j ). In other words, we added the box centered at T (i + (cid:100) j−i
the vicinity parameter . This gave a great boost in the performance of our SVM and we were happy to ﬁnd that
only using the medloop motif DMS and CMCT data was suﬃcient to obtain a training error of 0 using a linear
kernel; in other words, the medloop motif training data inputted into our SVM was capable of predicting its
own structure. This was an expected result, since the medloop motif data has a well-deﬁned chemical footprint
from which the structure can be quickly inferred by visual inspection.

3.2 Testing other SVM parameters

After enhancing our feature vector, we performed a leave one out type of cross validation, separating a whole
set of vectors corresponding to a RNA in each trial. Setting each parameter to its default value (which would
be zero for all parameters), we ﬁrst optimized with respect to C , then with respect to the kernel type, then γ
and, lastly, , taking the best value in each step. We found that the linear and second degree polynomial kernels
performed well overall, while the higher degree polynomial kernels and the gaussian kernel tended to overﬁt the
SVM2 .

3.3 Taking joint DMS and CMCT data

At ﬁrst, we thought that DMS and CMCT data should be treated separately, building and testing training sets
that included only DMS data or only CMCT data. This led to poor training precision and recall values, close
to 0. However, we found that arbitrarily adding both types of data to the training and testing sets greatly
improved the accuracy of the results, to the point where, when we apply the ﬁltering method described above,
we could get the complete secondary structure for the medloop and SRPH8 motif (sadly, we could not fully
test this with the larger tRNA data, since we are missing the CMCT tapestry). This may follow from the
intuitive idea that DMS and CMCT data complement themselves since they modify diﬀerent nucleotides. To
our surprise, by predicting using a training set of DMS and CMCT data, with a testing set only comprised of
SHAPE data, we get noisy but visually good results (for example, the number of stems predicted is accurate).
This indicates, that in all chemical footprinting methods, the RNA structure manifests itself in, qualitatively,
the same manner.

2We varied the radial parameter of the gaussian kernel, but could not get a good intermediate between an extreme overﬁt and
an extreme underﬁt, in which it could perform similar to the linear kernel.

4

4 Discussion and future work

We have described a SVM approach to analyze high-throughput chemical modiﬁcation probings of RNA struc-
ture. This is a recent experimental approach that is much faster and cheaper than the crystalography method
that is considered the gold standard when determining RNA structure. Its high-throughput nature gives us
vast amounts of data that are ideal for machine learning analysis. Our current ﬁltered SVM method can give
an accurate estimate of the secondary structure. What is most striking is that there is no thermodynamics in-
volved in our method, its ﬁndings are purely empirical3 . This not only illustrates the power of the experimental
method, but also gives great room for improvement by including thermodynamic rules or parameters in some
manner. Currently, our classiﬁer is trained with secondary structure interactions. We can easily extend the
power of our classiﬁer to tertiary contacts by adding known tertiary information for our training RNAs. In this
case, it would be best to have a second SVM that predicts tertiary interactions. Finally, although our ﬁltering
approach was suﬃcient to extract the secondary structure, it could be replaced with another SVM that ”cleans”
the ﬁrst SVM’s predictions based on another set of features (secondary substructure patterns in the predicted
base pairing plot are easily found by visual inspection, so there must be a way to estimate them using an
automatic classiﬁer). Furthermore, let us remember that we have a limited set of 4 RNAs, most of them missing
one of the three chemical types of chemical footprinting (DMS, CMCT, and SHAPE). As more experimental
data becomes available in the future, it can be easily integrated into our classiﬁer for further improvement.

5 Acknowledgements

We deeply thank the Das lab for giving us the tapestry data. Special thanks to Rhiju Das for his insightful
comments.

References

[1] Quentin Vicens Samuel M. Pearlman Michael Brenowitz Daniel Herschlag Alain Laederach, Rhiju Das and
Russ B. Altman. Semi-automated and rapid quantiﬁcation of nucleic acid footprinting and structure mapping
experiments. Nature Protocols, 3:1395–1401, 2008.

[2] C. B. Do, D. A. Woods, and S. Batzoglou. Contrafold: Rna secondary structure prediction without physics-
based models. Bioinformatics, 22(14), July 2006.

[3] E. J. Merino, K. A. Wilkinson, J. L. Coughlan, and K. M. Weeks. Rna structure analysis at single nucleotide
resolution by selective 2’-hydroxyl acylation and primer extension (shape). J Am Chem Soc, 127(12):4223–
4231, March 2005.

[4] Marc Parisien and Francois Ma jor. The mc-fold and mc-sym pipeline infers rna structure from sequence
data. Nature, 452(7183):51–55, March 2008.

[5] Michael Zuker. Mfold web server for nucleic acid folding and hybridization prediction. Nucleic Acids Res,
31:3406–3415, 2003.

3 It is interesting to note that all de novo algorithms for RNA structure prediction involve thermodynamics in some way, either
explicitly by following free energy minimization[4, 5], or implicitly by including thermodynamic parameters[2].

5

