Detecting Chronic Pain with Structural MRIs 
Hoameng Ung 
hoameng.ung@stanford.edu 
CS229, Autumn 2009, Stanford University 
 
Abstract 
 
The  subjective  nature  of  pain  makes  an  objective  measurement  difficult  to  produce.  If  such  a 
measurement  is  possible,  then  this  knowledge  would  assist  in  the management  of  patients  whose  self 
report  of  pain  is  either  unavailable  or  called  into  question.  Past  studies  have  demonstrated  that 
chronic pain is associated with gray matter (GM) atrophy, detectable by magnetic resonance imaging. 
We  investigate  to  see  if  this  decline  of  GM  density  can  be  used  to  distinguish  between  healthy  and 
chronic  low  back  pain  (LBP)  subjects with  greater  than  chance  accuracy.  Structural MR  scans  from 
94 age and gender matched subjects were used. Several feature selection and reduction methods were 
performed, including grid and ROI parcellation, principal component analysis (PCA), and ranking by 
mutual  information.  Accuracy,  assessed  with  both  1-norm  and  2-norm  SVM  using  striated  10-fold 
cross-validation,  while  significant,  were  low  and  corresponding  features  driving  the  classifier  were 
inconsistent.  Parcellation  gave  a  high  of  64%  accuracy,  while  PCA  and  MI  gave  95%  and  97%, 
respectively. 
 
1. Introduction   
 

An  estimated  50  million  Americans  suffer 
from  chronic  pain,  and  the  costs  of  low  back 
pain  in  the  United  States  exceed  $100  billion 
per  year 
(1).  Since  pain 
is  subjective, 
self-reported pain cannot be verified. Because of 
this, an objective measure of pain could assist in 
the  management  of  patients  who  are  suspected 
of  malingering  or  drug  seeking  and  of  patients 
unable  to  communicate  such  as  the  critically  ill. 
Studies  have  shown  that  regional  changes  in 
gray  matter  density  resulting  from  chronic  pain 
are detectable by MRI (2) (3).   
Recently,  machine  learning  techniques  have 
been  adopted  in  the  field  of  neuroimaging  in  an 
attempt  to  learn  about  cognitive  science  and  to 
detect  conditions  based  on  imaging  data.  Some 
examples  include  the  detection  of  Alzheimer's 
and  Huntington's  disease  using  SVMs  and  gray 
matter  density  as  features  (1)  (2).  However, 
applications  to  detection  of  diseases  such  as 
Alzheimer's  and  Huntington's  are  fairly  trivial 
tasks  due  to  the  etiology  of  the  disease  and  its 

tremendous  effect  on  the  structure  of  the  brain 
with  time.  The  etiology  of  chronic  pain  is 
relatively  more  complicated.  The  differences  in 
the  type  of  pain  have  been  shown  to  affect  the 
underlying  biological  changes.  For  instance, 
Apkarian  demonstrated  a  larger  decline  in  gray 
matter  density  with  neuropathic  chronic  pain 
patients  versus  nonneuropathic  patients  through 
Voxel  Based  Morphometry  (VBM)  analysis 
techniques (3). 
VBM  is  currently  the  standard  method  used 
to  study  differences  in  tissue  classes  between 
subjects  with  structural  MRI  data  (4).  It 
essentially allows voxel-by-voxel comparison of 
subjects  by 
transforming  each  brain 
to  a 
template  and  then  performing  statistical  tests  on 
the voxel level. The advantage of using an SVM 
as  opposed  to  traditional  techniques  of  VBM  is 
that  an  SVM  is  can  capture  higher  dimensional 
relationships  within 
than 
rather 
the  data, 
comparing  between  individual  voxels  as  in 
VBM. 
In 
addition,  SVMs 
allow 
for 
classification  of  one  sample,  whereas  VBM 

2/5 

analyses  are  generally  limited  to  comparisons 
between groups of subjects. 
 
2. Materials and Methods 
 
2.1. Dataset 
 

 

The  dataset 
includes  94  gender  and 
age-matched  subjects  (47  controls,  47  patients). 
Chronic  pain  patients  were  defined  as  having 
greater  than  6  months  of  pain.  Each  scan  was 
segmented  into  gray  matter  and  normalized  to 
the  MNI  template.  Each  example  contained 
roughly  300,000  features,  with  each  feature 
corresponding  to  the  gray  matter  density  at  a 
particular voxel. Each feature was normalized to 
a Euclidean distance of 1. 
 
2.2. Feature Selection and Reduction 
 

Four  different  feature  reduction/selection 
methods  were  employed:  Two 
types  of 
parcellation,  principal  components,  and  ranking 
based on mutual information.   
 
2.2.1. Grid parcellation   
 

Each  gray  matter  map  was  divided  into 
5x5x5  voxel  volumes,  and  the  gray  matter 
density  averaged  within  each.  Each  volume 
represented  1  cm3  cubes.  To  prevent  skewed 
volumes,  volumes  with  fewer  than  10  voxels 
were  averaged  into  the  nearest  volume  with 
greater  than  or  equal  to  10  voxels.  This method 
reduced the number of features to roughly 2100.   
 
2.2.2. AAL Parcellation   
 

The  Automatic  Anatomical  Labeling 
template  divides  the  brain  into  116  different 
ROIs  based  on  anatomical  structure.  Each  gray 
matter map was divided  into  these ROIs and  the 
gray  matter  density  averaged  within  each, 
producing 116 features.   
 

2.2.3. Principal components   
 

Principal  component  analysis  (PCA)  was 
used  to  determine  the  directionality  of  the 
training  data.  The  dataset  was  transformed  into 
principal component space, consisting of 93 PCs. 
The weights of the feature vector, corresponding 
to  weights  of  each  principal  component,  was 
transformed  back 
into  brain  space  by  a 
multiplication  by  the  eigenvectors  (principal 
components)  and  the  most  highly  weighted 
individual  voxels  were  found.  This  method  is 
similar to that employed in (5). 
 
2.2.4. Mutual Information   
 

Mutual  information  (MI)  was  calculated  for 
each  of  the  original  voxels  with  the  labels. 
Intensity  values  were  discretized  to  100  values 
in  the  range  [0,  1]  and  label  {-1,  1}.  Ranking 
was  performed  using  a  forward  search  wrapper 
method,  adding  the  highest  MI  valued  features 
at  a  time  until  the  error  from  leave-one-out 
cross-validation 
(LOOCV) 
increased.  This 
resulted in the selection of 55 individual voxels. 
 
2.3. Classification 
 

Both an L1 and L2 regularized SVM (with a 
linear  kernel)  was  used  with  each  feature 
reduction  method.  The  MATLAB  SVM 
implementation  was  developed  by  Anton 
Schwaighofer  and  other  code  was  based  on 
in-house 
implementations.  C 
parameter 
selection was done using a  standard grid  search. 
10-fold  striated  cross-validation  was  used  to 
assess  the performance of  the classifier. Striated 
k-fold  cross-validation  involves  selecting  an 
equal  ratio  of  examples  from  each  class 
representative  of  the  dataset  on  a whole  and  has 
been  shown  to  be  more  accurate  at  assessing 
performance (7). 
The  significance  of  the  performance  was 
assessed  using  a  Monte  Carlo  permutation  test, 
iterated  1000 
times.  This 
test 
involves 

3/5 

permuting  the  labels  and  rerunning  the  training 
and  testing  to  determine  if  the  separation  was 
based  on  meaningful  patterns  between  the  two 
classes. 
 
2.4. Regression 
 

Linear  regression  was  performed  using 
elastic  net  regularization  with  grid  parcellated 
features.  A  MATLAB  implementation  of  Least 
Angle  Regression  (LARS)  by  Sjöstrand  was 
used.  The  dependent  variable  was  the  duration 
in  pain  (years).  The  model  was  trained  on  70% 
of  the  data  and  tested  on  the  remaining  30%. 
The  resulting  beta  weights  were  used 
to 
determine the volumes driving the classifier. 
 
3. Results 
 
3.1. Classification Accuracies 
 

Accuracies  for  grid  and  AAL  parcellation 
were  marginally  better  than  chance.  Feature 
reduction by PCA resulted in high accuracies, as 
well  as  selection  of  voxels  by  computation  of 
the  MI  values  (Table  1).  With  PCA,  100% 
accuracy  was  achieved  based  on  the  first  93 
principal  components,  and  97%  with  MI.  The 
linear regression by elastic net resulted  in a sum 
of squared errors of 5.29 (years). 
Differences 
accuracy 
in 
classification 
between  1-norm  and  2-norm  SVMs  were 
marginal at best. 
 
3.2. Neuronal correlates 
 
The  weights  obtained  by  training  with  the 
SVM  indicate  the  features  most  important  in 
determining  whether  an  example  belongs  to  a 
specific  class.  For  AAL  parcellation,  highly 
weighted  features  include  the  right  pallidum 
(Figure  1a).  For  grid  parcellation,  the  highly 
weighted  features  includes  a  section  of  the  left 
thalamus,  a  part  of  the  ventromedial  prefrontal 
cortex (VMPC), and a part of the dorsolateral 

Feature Selection   
Method 
Grid (1700) 

1-norm   
SVM   
64% 

2-norm   
SVM   
61% 

AAL (116) 

62% 

64% 

PCA (93) 

MI (55) 

100% 

100% 

97% 

96% 

 
Table 1. Classification accuracies based on 
 
feature selection methods (with its 
 
corresponding number of features) and 1, 
 
2-norm SVMs. All values are significant p<0.05 
 
 
prefrontal  cortex  (DLPC)  (Figure  1b).  PCA  and 
MI gave  individual voxels  that were delocalized 
throughout the brain (not shown). Regression by 
elastic  net  performed  on  grid  parcellated 
features  have  similarities  to  the  weights  given 
by training with the SVM (Figure 1c). 
 
4. Discussion 
 

The  accuracies  obtained  for  parcellation  are 
poor,  but  because  it  is  significant,  this  indicates 
that  something  can  be  learned  about  the  dataset 
provided. 
The  AAL  template  is  commonly  used  to 
select  predefined  ROIs,  but 
the 
lack  of 
specificity  may  explain  the  low  accuracy.  The 
large  divisions  of  the  brain  will  mask  any 
regional  differences  within  each  ROI.  For 
instance,  different  parts  of  the  cingulate  cortex 
are  known  to  have  different  functions,  so 
grouping  them  all  and  averaging  their  gray 
matter  densities  may  smooth  out  any  existing 
differences.  Nonetheless,  areas  that  are  much 
smaller are captured by the AAL divisions, such 
as  the  pallidum.  Since  the  pallidum  is  involved 
in  thalamic  pathways,  such  as  inhibiting  the 
relaying  of  sensory  stimuli  from  specific  nuclei, 
overstimulation may lead to changes. 
 

a)   

b)   

c)   

 

Figure 1. Highly weighted features by a) AAL 
 
parcellation    b) grid parcellation and c) elastic net 
 
regression 
 
 
Grid  parcellation  was  motivated  by  prior 
knowledge  about  the  functions  of  anatomical 
parts  in  the  brain.  With  chronic  pain,  certain 
structural  areas  of  the  brain  are  expected  to  be 
affected.  Thus,  parcellation  into  1  cm3  volumes 
is  small enough  to capture areas of  interest. The 
thalamus  is  believed  to  be  a  site  that  relays 
sensory  information  received  from  the  body 
towards  different  cortices  in  the  brain  and  is 
believed  to play  a  role  in mediating pain  signals 
(7)  (8)  (9).  Nociceptive  stimuli  synapse  at  the 
thalamus  before  being  sent  to  parts  of  the 
prefrontal cortex. For this reason, an overload of 
sensory  stimulus  at  the  thalamus  can  cause  a 
decrease  in  gray  matter  density,  a  result  of 
suppressed  neuronal  activity  from  a  decrease  in 

4/5 

membrane  receptors,  neuronal  cell  degeneration, 
or  neuron  apoptosis.  The  prefrontal  cortex  has 
also  been  shown  to  mediate  chronic  pain. 
Decreases  in  DLPC  gray  matter  density  align 
with previous findings (3).     
Principal  component  analysis  enables  very 
high  accuracy  when  performed  on  the  original 
features.  Upon  transformation  of  the  weight 
vector  back  into  brain  space,  the  individual 
voxels 
that  were  highly  weighted  were 
delocalized 
any 
show 
not 
did 
and 
comprehensible  pattern.  The  first  principal 
component  explains  only  18%  of  the  variance, 
and  subsequent  components  much  less.  The 
need  for  many  components  to  explain  the  data 
may  indicate a  low  signal  to noise  ratio, and  the 
components may not capture conditions inherent 
in the underlying condition.   
Feature  ranking  by  mutual  information  was 
performed  on  the  original  feature  set,  and, 
through 
cross-validation, 
resulted 
in 
the 
selection  of  55  individual  voxels.  These  voxels 
were,  similar  to  the  PCA  results,  scattered 
throughout  the  brain  and  were  unhelpful  in 
determining  correlations  with  chronic  pain  and 
brain structure. 
The  use  of  a  1-norm  SVM  has  been  shown 
to  give  better  performance  in  the  presence  of 
feature  redundancies  (10).  Thus,  if  multiple 
areas  of  the  brain  undergo  atrophy,  then  this 
would  be  a  redundant  feature  and  performance 
should  improve  with  the  use  of  an  L1  norm 
penalty.  Although  a  1-norm  SVM  gave  higher 
accuracies  in  certain  cases,  the  improvement 
was marginal at best. 
Since  duration  of  chronic  pain  also  helps 
determine  the  amount  of  gray  matter  loss  (3),  a 
regression  where  the  dependent  variable  is 
duration of pain may help determine areas of the 
brain  affected  by  LBP.  The  elastic  net  is  a 
regularization  and  variable  selection  method 
that represents  the data as a sparse matrix where 
a  limited  number  of  features  are  given  weights 
the  number  of 
thus  useful  when 
and 
is 
predictors 
is  greater 
than 
the  number  of 

examples  (14).  The  resulting  beta  weights 
closely  aligned  with  the  results  from  grid 
parcellation,  indicating  that  those  features  are 
important  in  determining  both  the  duration  of 
pain with regression and the presence of chronic 
pain with classification. 
Future  directions  would  be  to  obtain  more 
data in order to increase the signal to noise ratio. 
Furthermore,  manual 
feature  selection  by 
defining  ROIs  may  prove  helpful.  For  instance, 
ROIs  of  the  left  thalamus,  DLPC,  and  VMPC 
and  classifying  based  only  on  voxels  in  those 
areas  may  be  interesting.  In  addition,  LBP 
encompasses  a  fairly  large  array  of  conditions, 
and  each  of  these  conditions may  have  different 
effects  on  the  brain.  A  narrower  subset  of 
patients may help in classification.   
 
5. Conclusion   
 

Although  classification  accuracy  was  low 
for  parcellated  features,  the  resulting  weights 
indicate  that  decreased  gray  matter  density  in 
the left thalamus, DLPC, and VLPC help predict 
incidence  of  chronic  pain.  The  low  accuracy  of 
parcellation  methods  and  the  high  accuracy  of 
PCA  and  MI  performed  on  original  voxels 
indicate  a  low  signal  to  noise  ratio  in  the  data 
possibly  a  result  of  the  variability  in  the 
underlying  LBP  conditions.  Better 
feature 
reduction  methods,  such  as  manual  selection  of 
ROIs,  may  be  performed  and  more  data 
gathered 
this  noise. 
reduce 
to 
in  order 
Nonetheless, the significance of the values gives 
a  promising  outlook  that  gray  matter  density 
may be used to detect chronic pain. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 

I would  like  to  thank Catie Chang and Quoc 
Le  for  providing  guidance  in  this  project,  as 
well  as  Professor  Andrew  Ng  for  instructing 
CS229.  In  addition,  I  would  like  to  thank  Dr. 
Sean Mackey  and  Dr.  Amit  Etkin  for  providing 
data used in this analysis. 

5/5 

References 
 
1. Lumbar Disc Disorders and Low-Back Pain: 
Socioeconomic Factors and Consequences. Katz, J. 
2006, The Journal of Bone and Joint Surgery, pp. 
21-24. 
2. Chronic Back Pain is Associated with Decreased 
Prefrontal and Thalamic Gray Matter Density. 
Apkarian, AV. 2004, The Journal of Neuroscience, 
pp. 10410-10415. 
3. Chronic pain may change the structure of the 
brain. May, Arne. 2008, Pain, pp. 7-15. 
4. Automatic classification of MR scans in 
Alzheimer's disease. Klöppel, Stefan. 2008, Brain, 
pp. 681-689. 
5. Support vector machine-based classification of 
Alzheimer's disease from whole-brain anatomical 
MRI. Magnin, B. 2009, Neuroradiology, pp. 72-83. 
6. Voxel-based morphometry -- the methods. 
Ashburner, John. 2000, Neuroimage, pp. 805-21. 
7. Classifying brain states and determining the 
discriminating activation patterns: Support Vector 
Machine on functional MRI data. Mourao-Miranda, 
Janaina. 2005, NeuroImage. 
8. A Study of Cross-Validation and Bootstrap for 
Accuracy Estimation and Model Selection. Kohavi, 
Ron. 1995, International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence. 
9. Functional MRI Study of Thalamic and Cortical 
Activations Evoked by Cutaneous Heat, Cold, and 
Tactile Stimuli . David, Karen. 1988, The Journal of 
Neurophysiology, pp. 1533-1546. 
10. Affective components and intensity of pain 
correlate with structural differences in gray matter 
in chronic back pain patients. Schmidth-Wilcke. 
2006, Pain, pp. 89-97. 
11. Abnormal brain chemistry in chronic back pain: 
an in vivo proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
study. Grachey, Igor. 2000, Pain, pp. 7-18. 
12. 1-norm Support Vector Machines. Zhu, J. 2003, 
NIPS. 
13. Regularization and variable selection via the 
elastic net. Zuo, H. 2005, Journal of the Royal 
Statistical Society B. 
 

