 

 

Estimating Missing Temporal Attributes  
In Genealogical Data 
Nam Wook Kim 
Stanford Visualization Group 
Stanford University 
namwkim@cs.stanford.edu 

 
ABSTRACT 
We  present  a  machine  learning  approach  for  estimating 
missing  temporal  attributes  in  genealogical  data.  Geneal-
ogy  analyses  have  been  commonly  focused  on  understand-
ing  generational  relations.  The  importance  of  temporal 
analyses has often been suppresed in genealogical research. 
We have observed that temporal attributes of an individual, 
birth,  death,  marriage  and  divorce  dates,  are  frequently 
missing  in  genealogical  data.  Filling  out  those  attributes 
allows users to reconstruct temporal streams of their family 
stories,  which  in  turn  make  fruitful  genealogy  analyses 
possible. 
Keywords:  Machine  Learning,  Visualization,  Genealogy, 
Missing data 
INTRODUCTION 
Genealogy  is  an  incredibly  popular  activity  pursued  by 
millions  of  people  spanning  from  hobbyist  genealogists  to 
professional  genealogy  researchers.  Genealogical  research 
involves  understanding  not  only  not  only  where  and  when 
people  lived,  but  also  their  life  styles  and  biographies.  In 
addition, it often requires, or leads to, diverse knowledge of 
religion  histories,  migration  trends,  political  and  historical 
social  conditions  and  genetics.  Complex  nature  of  geneal-
ogy  leveraging  diverse  fields  lends  itself  to  a  challenging 
problem  as well  as  incredibly  useful  for  enriching  commu-
nity. 
    Correctly  identifying  individuals  and  their  relationships 
are  the  most  important  part  of  genealogical  research.  To 
keep track of their findings, people often use typical genea-
logical  graphs  such  as  pedigree  charts  and  descendent 
charts.  Such  existing  graphs  are  limited  in  showing  only 
generational  relations.  We  have  previously  developed  a 
new  visualization  for  genealogical  data  (Figure  1).  It  is 
designed  to  reveal  other  useful  aspects  of  the  data  with 
focus  on  temporal  information.  It  requires  temporal  attrib-
utes,  birth,  death, marriage  and  divorce  dates,  to  be  visual-
ized. Not  only  enabling  efficient  temporal  analysis  in  fam-
ily  history,  it  also  provides  a  way  to  identify  non-
hierarchical  patterns  such  as  divorce,  re-marriage  and  in-
termarriage. 
    A  commonly  faced  problem  in  producing  the  visualiza-
tion is that required temporal attributes are frequently miss-
ing. Filling out missing attributes will allow users to recon-
struct temporal streams of their family stories through visu-

Figure  1:  Temporal  Visualization  of  Genealogy: 
converging  and  diverging  lines  indicate  marriage 
and divorce respectively. Parent-child relationship is 
signified by a gray drop line  

 

alizations,  which  in  turn  make  fruitful  genealogy  analyses 
possible.  
    In  addition,  missing  temporal  attributes  are  important  in 
larger genealogy context as well. For example, genealogists 
often  run  into  the  ambiguity  problem  when  identifying  an 
individual  in  ancestry.  Two  possible  sources  for  the  ambi-
guity come from geographic location and temporal records. 
If  it were  possible  to  estimate  dates,  genealogists would  be 
able  to  gain  insight  figuring  out  who  is  likely  to  be  their 
ancestors and their temporal relationships. 
    In  this  paper,  we  present  a  machine  learning  based  ap-
proach  for  estimating missing  temporal  attributes  in  genea-
logical data. We have used Freebase web  service  to  extract 
genealogical  data.  Features  are  constructed  based  on  evi-
dences  from  non-missing  attributes.  Support  vector  regres-
sion is then used to estimate missing temporal attributes. At 
final  stage,  estimated  attributes  are  fed  into  the  visualiza-
tion system. The visualization put visual makers  to  indicate 
the presence of estimated attributes, or missing attributes. 
   
RELATED WORK 
Many  researchers  in  different  fields  such  as  statistics  have 
faced  missing  data  problems.  Yumei  at  el  [1]  introduced  a 
support  vector  regression  (SVR)  based  approach  to  filling 
in  missing  values.  To  do  it,  they  set  the  decision  attribute 
(output  attribute)  as  the  condition  attribute  (input  attribute) 
and  the  condition  attribute  as  the  decision  attribute.  SVM 
regression  is  then  executed  to  predict  the  condition  attrib-
ute  values.  They  compared  results  with  different  methods 
not  using machine  learning  techniques,  including  the mean 
and  median  of  all  the  values  of  the  same  class.  They  then 
showed that SVR approach outperformed than the others.  

 

 
Feng at el [2] also presented a SVR based imputing method 
utilizing  orthogonal  coding  scheme  to  estimate  missing 
values  for  DNA  microarray  gene  expression  data.  A  com-
parative  study  of  their  method  with  the  previously  devel-
oped  methods  such  as  K  nearest  neighbor  and  Bayesian 
principal  component  analysis  impute method  demonstrated 
that the SVR method has powerful estimation ability.  
Drizd  at  el  [3]  addressed  importance  of  properly  handling 
missing and uncertain data in visualizations. They observed 
that missing data  sometimes  causes misinterpretation. With 
between-subject  graph  interpretation  study,  they  concluded 
that  correctly  identifying  missing  data  and  indicating  the 
presence of them are necessary. 
METHODS 
In  this  section,  we  describe  overall  procedure  of  our  sys-
tem.  We  do  this  by  dividing  the  system  into  five  different 
stages,  data  extraction,  feature  set  construction,  support 
vector regression, data estimation and visualization.  
Data Extraction 
We  build  a  web  interface  that  extracts  genealogical  data 
from  Freebase  web  service  (Figure  2).  A  user  can  specify 
four  parameters,  filename,  start  date,  end  date  and  maxi-
mum  size.  Person  entries  whose  lifespans  are  within  the 
bound,  from  the  start  date  to  the  end  date  are  extracted  up 
to  the  specified  maximum  size.  To  avoid  script  time  limit, 
multiple  queries  are  sent  to  Freebase  in  sequence  and  then 
results are concatenated into a single array.  
Feature Set Construction 
To  construct  feature  sets,  we  make  use  of  strong  relations 
among  temporal  attributes.  In  other  words,  each  attribute 
plays  a  pivotal  role  in  estimating  another  attribute.  For  ex-
ample,  marriage  dates  can  be  inferred  from  birth  dates  of 
children  and  vice  versa. We  summarized  how we  use  rele-
vant  information contained  in other  attributes  to  create  fea-
tures (Table 1).  
Attribute 
Birth date 

Relevant Information 
Sibling’s birth date, parents’ 
marriage 
spouse’s 
date, 
birth  date,  child’s  birth 
date... 
Sibling’s  death  date,  par-
ents’ 
date, 
marriage 
spouse’s death date… 
birth date, death date, oldest 
child’s  birth  date,  spouse’s 
birth and death dates… 
birth  date,  death  date, 
youngest  child’s  birth  date, 
spouse’s  birth  and  death 
dates … 

Death Date 

Marriage Date 

Divorce Date 

Table  1  A  subset  of  features  for  each  attribute  is 
shown.  For  example,  for  birth  date,  we  can  further 
use  attributes,  other  than  the  ones  given,  such  as 
siblings’ death dates or parent’s divorce date and so 
on and so forth. 
    There  are  a  number  of  constraints  in  relationships  be-
tween  different  attributes.  For  example,  child’s  birth  date 
cannot  be  after  mother’s  death  or  parents’  marriage  date 
cannot  be  after  child’s  birth  unless  it’s  the  child  out  of 
wedlock. Another extreme case is father’s birth date is after 
child’s  birth  date.  In  our  system,  however,  we  do  not  en-

Figure  2:  Web  Interface  for  genealogy  data  extrac-
tion  

 

force these constraints.  
    Once  feature  attributes  of  individuals  are  extracted,  we 
normalize  attributes  with  respect  to  a  reference  date.  For 
example,  let  say  we  have  a  feature  tuple  (sibling’s  birth 
date  (SBB),  parents’  marriage  date  (PM),  spouse’s  birth 
date  (SPB),  child’s  birth  date  (CB)  and  we  normalize  it 
with  respect  to  parents’  marriage  date.  It  then  becomes 
(SBB-PM,  SPB-PM,  CB-PM).  Every  example  in  the  fea-
ture  set  is  normalized  in  such  way.  Accordingly,  the  nor-
malization process  reduces  the dimension of  the  feature  set 
by  one.  A  primary  reason  for  this  normalization  is  that 
range  of  dates  can  be  very  large  possibly  spanning  from  -
9999  to  2009. This  requires  huge  amount  of  data  for  train-
ing sets.  
    There  are  two  problems when  constructing  a  feature  set, 
missing  features  and  outliers.  It  is  observed  that  features 
are frequently missing either because of the incompleteness 
or  nonexistence  (i.e.  missing  records  for  siblings  or  non-
existence  of  siblings).  For  either  case,  we  use  the  mean  of 
existing  values  to  fill  in  the  missing  feature  value.  If  the 
reference  date  is  missing,  we  simply  discard  the  example. 
The  missing  feature  problem  occurs  again  at  the  data  esti-
mation stage, which in turn requires constructing more than 
one  feature  set  for  each  attribute  with  different  reference 
dates.      In  addition,  after  constructing  the  normalized  fea-
ture  set,  we  detect  and  remove  outliers.  For  example,  it 
may  not  make  sense  that  difference  between  child’s  birth 

 

 

 

 

 

Figure  3:  the  above  is  a  boxplot  of  the  feature  set 
normalized  with  respect  to  sibling’s  birth  date  (F0) 
and  the  below  is  the  same  with  parents’  marriage 
date (F1). 

date and parents’ marriage  is greater  than  100 years,  so we 
remove  the  example. Aside  from  the  aforementioned  prob-
lems, if there are more than one sibling, we use the mean of 
siblings’  birth  dates.  We  do  same  thing  for  similar  attrib-
utes  such  as  spouses’  birth  dates,  in  case  multiple  spouses 
exist. 
Support Vector Regression 
After  the  feature  set  is  constructed,  we  divide  it  into  train-
ing  set  and  test  set  (70%  and  30%).  We  then  use  epsilon-
support  vector  regression  to  learn  parameters  from  the 
training set:  

2

+

C

 

)

w

(
*
ξ ξ
+
i
i

minimize 

subject to 

1
2
y
− <
i
w x
,
<
i

l
∑
i
1
=
b
w x
,
ε ξ
> − ≤ +
i
i
b y
*
ε ξ
> + −
≤ +
i
i
0
,
*
ξ ξ
≥
i
i
We  used  fixed  value  0.1  for  epsilon  and  did  10-fold  cross-
validation  test on  the  training  set  to  determine  the  regulari-
zation parameter C.  
Data Estimation 
    At this stage, we run  into the same missing feature prob-
lem  presented  at  the  feature  set  construction  stage.  We 
briefly  describe  how  this  problem  enforces  construction  of 
feature  sets  using  different  reference  dates.  Let’s  assume 
that  we  are  estimating  missing  birth  dates  and  have  a  nor-
malized  feature  set  with  respect  to  parents’  marriage  date. 

Figure  4:  the  percent  of  the  total  variability  ex-
plained by each principal component. The  left  figure 
is for F0 and the right figure is for F1. 

 

After  the  parameter  w  is  learned  using  the  support  vector 
regression,  we  now  estimate  person  A’s  birth  date  in  real 
time.  If A has  no  parents’ marriage date  available, we  can-
not proceed.  
    If A  has  sibling’s  birth  date  and  the  feature  set was  nor-
malized with  respect  to  it, we  could perform  the estimation 
of  A’s  birth  date.  This  informs  us  that  we  need  to  learn 
more  than  one  parameter  w  from  feature  sets  that  are  nor-
malized with respect to different reference dates. 
Visualization 
    Estimated attributes are  then used  to generate a  temporal 
visualization of genealogical data. We place visual markers 
to indicate the presence of missing attributes. 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
    In  this  section,  we  present  results  on  estimating  birth 
dates. Estimating other attributes will be similarly done. To 
measure the performance, we use the normalized root mean 
square error (NRMSE) defined as follows: 
y
mean y
[(
−
answer
guess
y
variance[
]
answer
    Among  endless  possibility  of  features,  we  narrowed  it 
down  to  five  features,  siblings’  birth  dates,  spouses’  birth 
dates,  parents’  marriage  date,  children’s  birth  dates  and 
marriage  date.  Because  of  frequent  missing  feature  prob-
lem,  we  hypothesized  that  having  less  number  of  features 
would lessen the problem. We then constructed two feature 
sets  with  two  reference  dates,  parents’  marriage  date  and 
siblings’  birth  dates  (we  call  F0  and  F1  respectively).  Be-
fore  running  the  support  vector  regression,  we  have  done 
data analysis on the feature sets. Figure 3 shows box blot of 
normalized features. Both  feature  sets  seem  to  follow  simi-
lar  distributions. We  then  tried  principal  component  analy-
sis  (Figure 4). They  also  show  similar patterns. That  is,  the 
first  two  principal  components  cover  more  than  70%  of 
variances  and  the  first  component  has  positive  coefficients 
for  all  features.  Although  we  end  up  using  all  the  given 
features, we  could  reduce  the  dimension  of  the  feature  sets 
by  two.  Considering  the  missing  feature  problem,  we  be-

NRMSE

) ]
2

=

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

Figure  4:  the  percent  of  the  total  variability  ex-
plained by each principal component. The  left  figure 
is for F0 and the right figure is for F1. 

lieve  that  further  reducing  features  but  maintain  accuracy 
of  estimation  will  be  crucial  in  estimating  temporal  attrib-
utes in genealogical data. 
    With  10-fold  cross  validation, we  choose  the  regulariza-
tion  parameters  C=1  for  both  feature  sets.  We  then,  run 
support  vector  regression  on  training  sets  of  different  size 
(Figure 5). We observed that, with more training examples, 
the  performance  increase.  For  the  largest  training  set,  we 
got NRMSEs of 0.0053 and 0.0002 for the feature sets with 
different reference dates respectively.  
We  have  also  done  feature  ranking  using  fishers’  criterion 
and  forward  search  to  select  the best  subset  of  features. As 
nothing  interesting  found,  we  do  not  describe  them  in  this 
paper. We have also done data estimation on  real  time data 
and have visualized Charles Darwin’s genealogy and Eliza-
beth II of United Kingdom’s genealogy (Figure 6)  
 

 

 

Figure  4:  The  above  is  a  family  tree  of  Elizabeth  II 
of United Kingdom  and  the  below  is a  family  tree  of 
Charles Darwin. 

CONCLUSION 
We  have  presented  a  machine  learning  based  system  for 
estimating missing  temporal  attributes  in  genealogical  data 
and  its  visualization.  The  overall  procedure  is  summarized 
as  follows.  First,  it  extracts  genealogical  data  from  Free-
base,  online  database  service.  Second,  it  constructs  feature 
sets  with  data  cleaning.  It  then  uses  the  support  vector  re-
gression  to  learn  to  estimate  missing  attributes.  Estimated 
attributes are then used to generate visualization.  
There  are  several  natural  avenues  for  future  work.  First, 
one  might  extend  the  system  so  that  users  can  author,  or 
supply,  training  data  through  visualization  on  the  fly.  Sec-
ond, not only placing a visual maker for estimated attribute, 
one  might  visualize  uncertainty  of  estimation.  Lastly,  we 
mentioned biological  constraints  in  feature  set  construction 
section  (e.g.  parents’  marriage  date  vs  child’s  birth  date) 
One might enforce such constraints to improve accuracy. 

 

4.  Yi Cao, Kim Leng Poh, "An Accurate and Robust Miss-
ing Value Estimation  for Microarray Data:  Least Abso-
lute Deviation Imputation," icmla, pp.157-161, Fifth In-
ternational  Conference  on  Machine  Learning  and  Ap-
plications (ICMLA'06), 2006. 
5.  Oba S, Sato MA, Takemasa I, et al. A Bayesian missing 
value  estimation  method  for  gene  expression  profile 
data. Bioinformatics (2003) 19:2088–96. 
6.  Alex  J.  Smola  ,   Bernhard  Schölkopf  ,   Bernhard  Sch 
Olkopf.  A  Tutorial  on  Support  Vector  Regression,  Sta-
tistics and Computing 2003. 

 
7. Cherkassky  V,  Ma  Y.  Practical  Selection  of  SVM  Pa-
rameters  and  Noise  Estimation  for  SVM  Regression. 
2004. PubMed, 113-26. 

 
Missing  data  has  been  always  a  problem  in  visualization 
field.  In  fact,  most  current  visualization  system  will  crash 
with missing data. We believe  that our  system will provide 
a  guide  to  visualization  researchers  on  using  machine 
learning techniques to handle missing information. 
REFERENCES 
1.  Honghai,  F. Guoshun, C. Cheng, Y. Bingru, Y. Yumei, 
C. 2005. A SVM Regression Based Approach to Filling 
in Missing Values. Springer, 581-587. 
2.  Xian Wang, Ao  Li, Zhaohui  Jiang  and Huanqing  Feng. 
2006.  Missing  value  estimation  for  DNA  microarray 
gene expression data by Support Vector Regression Im-
putation  and  Orthogonal  Coding  Scheme.  BMC  Bioin-
formatics, 7:32. 
3.  Cyntrica  Eaton1,  Catherine  Plaisant1,  Terence  Drizd.  
Visualizing Missing  Data:  Classification  and  Empirical 
Study.  Proceedings of INTERACT 2005, Springer. 

 

 

