Multiclass SVMs for Olfactory Classication
CS229 Final Project Report

Michael Styer

Computer Science Department, Stanford University

1

Introduction

The study of olfactory classication has many attractions, philosophical and theoretical as well as practical
and functional. As part of the study of human cognition, it is widely recognized that the olfactory sense is
a fundamental component of the human perceptual system. The human brain is believed to have evolved
around the olfactory sense, and consequently the algorithms evolved for olfaction form the foundations of
the algorithms used by the other senses.
Input from all sensory modalities converges in the entorhinal
cortex, indicating a degree of common processing function across the senses [14]. Olfaction is also an
important and valuable perceptual mechanism for making distinctions about ob jects in and states of the
physical world. The development of the so-called electronic nose over the past thirty years has led to a
wide variety of applications, from quality analysis in the food and pharmaceutical industries to explosive
and biological agent screening in security and defense applications. More potential applications present
themselves, dependent on advances in sensor technology and signal processing algorithms, among them
medical diagnosis, environmental quality monitoring, autonomous bomb disposal robot navigation, and
smart re alarm and industrial monitoring systems, among others.
This research pro ject concentrates on the problem of classication of an unknown odorant into one
of a set of previously observed classes, the problem in general of multiclass classication in a supervised
learning framework. In the olfactory sensing context there are several components required of a sucessful
classication algorithm: preprocessing, feature extraction, and classication. Previous research has applied
various statistical learning techniques to each of these sub-problems. For preprocessing, techniques include
feature normalization and baseline subtraction; for feature extration, methods include principal component
analysis, linear discriminant analysis, and Sammon and Kohonen maps; and for classication, techinques in-
clude Bayesian classiers, K-nearest neighbors, articial neural networks, radial basis functions and, recently,
support vector machines.
The paper proceeds in the standard fashion. In Section 2, we describe the problem of olfactory sensing in
general and describe the distinguishing characteristics of the particular problem considered in this research
paper. In Section 3, we identify the ma jor trends in previous and current research into this problem. In
Section 4, we describe the approach taken in this paper and locate our techniques within the broader scope
of related research. In Section 5 we describe the results obtained , and nally in Section 6 we discuss the
results and outline directions for further research.

2 Problem Description

The problem of automatic olfactory classication has several related components in addition to the elements
of the classication algorithm mentioned above. Perhaps most critical is the sensing apparatus itself. In the
mid- to late-1980s, researchers at the University of Warwick devloped sensor arrays with suciently broad
sensitivity to be used for odor classication as opposed to detection of specic odorants [12, 37, 38]. Gas
sensor techonology in general relies on a change in electrical or other properties of some material in the
presence of volatile organic compounds (VOCs). Early sensors included inorganic semicoductors (e.g [42]),
organic semiconducting polymers [12], and Langmuir-Blodgett lms (see, e.g., [2] and [43]). More recent
sensor technology includes piezoelectric sensors, which operate by changing resonating frequency due to
absorption of VOCs; metal-oxide-silicon eld-eect-transistor (MOSFET) devices, which employ a catalytic

1

metal whose reaction products cause a change in electrical conductivity; and optical ber sensors, in which a
glass ber is coated with a chemically active material that responds to the presence of VOCs by changing its
uorescent emission spectrum [31]. Cutting-edge research, however, employs nanotubes and other techniques
from nanotechnology to achieve substantially better results than previous methods (see, e.g. [41], [3], [25],
[46]).
Given an adequate sensor array, olfactory ob ject classication presents several connected challenges [20].
First, nearly all existing sensor types are sub ject to drift, a slow, random decrease in sensor response when
exposed to the same odorants under the same or similar conditions. As a result, sensor patterns learned
previously become obsolete, and the system's ability to identify known odors is compromised. The primary
solution to this problem has been periodic recalibration with a reference gas, but recently work has been doen
to develop signal processing techniques that can remove the dependence on recalibration [8]. Second, due
to the omnipresence of VOCs in the environment, and particularly in environments such as food-processing
plants or medical facilities in which many of the most promising applications of olfactory sensing technology
would be located, any olfactory sensing system must be able to extract the signal of the target olfactant
from a broad-spectrum background. Techniques for extracting the signal from the background include simple
dierencing, relative extraction and fractional extraction.
Third, a sensor response vector should be normalized for processing by subsequent classication algo-
rithms, to eliminate sensitivity to concentration in the classication system. This can be done locally, by
normalizing each feature vector independently, or globally, by restricting or scaling the response of each
sensor across all feature vectors. Fourth, a multiple sensor array yields a high-dimensional feature space,
which may be computationally dicult or impossible to process in the classication stage. As a result, a
strategy of feature extraction (e.g. linear discriminant analysis or principal component analysis), or feature
subset selection (e.g. randomized search over feature subsets) may be used to choose a subset of the full
feature set that gives a good classier while reducing the problem complexity.
Finally, given a normalized dataset with a selected feature subset, the problem remains to make a clas-
sication of an unknown odorant given previous exposure to a set of known odorants. This is a typical
ob ject classication problem not dissimilar to text classication or data mining, although the nonlinearity
of the sensor responses presents a challenge. Most of the common classication algorithms have been ap-
plied to this problem, including linear and quadratic classiers, K-nearest neighbors, neural networks (also
called Multi-Layer Perceptrons in this literature), radial basis function classiers, and recently support vector
machines.

3 Prior Research

Many of the early research pieces on olfactory classication drew on the literature of articial neural networks.
[38], one of the early presentations of the olfactory sensing technology, recommends neural networks as
showing promise for this application; examples include [21, 40, 45, 16]. Recent research also applies neural
networks to this problem, including [44, 15, 4]. Other approaches include fuzzy logic [11, 27], nearest
neighbors [33], fuzzy nearest neighbors [5], and genetic and evolutionary algorithms [10, 26]. Much recent
research seems to be in the area of biologically inspired systems, perhaps a revisiting of the neural network
approach [19, 39, 30, 32, 17, 35, 34, 28]. Finally, support vector machines have been successfully applied to
this problem as they have to classication problems in other domains [8, 29].

4 Current Approach

4.1 Data Set

The data set studied in this pro ject is a numerical simulation of results from a nanotechnology-based system
as discussed in section 2, under development by Evolved Machines and partner iSense, for the DARPA
RealNose program [1]. Real sensor data is not yet available, so a set of simulated data was made available
for this pro ject. The long-term ob jective would obviously be to develop and rene the classication algorithm
on the synthetic dataset and apply it to real sensor data when the sensor array is ready.
The data set consists of separate testing and training data. In each data set, an array of 100 sensors is
exposed to a sequence of 100 odorants. Each odorant is presented to the sensor individually in the presence

2

(a) Raw data

(b) After background subtraction

Fig. 1: Sensor 33 response over all training examples (time steps)

Algorithm 1 Background subtraction
for each sensor

for i=1 to maxBuckets

group sensor data points in i buckets
calculate differences between number of values in each bucket
find pair of buckets a and b with largest difference
calculate backgroundBoundary: upper boundary of bucket a
calculate numBelow: number of data points below backgroundBoundary
terminate when numBelow does not change for 5 iterations

end
discard data points below backgroudBoundary
rescale remaining data points to [0, 1]

end

of a background of signicant concentration consisting of two dierent, unknown odorants, and is presented
in 20 log-increasing concentrations from 10−3 to 10−1 . The sensors are designed to mimic the response
of human olfactory receptors; as a consequence, each sensor responds to a broad spectrum of odorants, so
that the signature response of a particular odorant will be a combination of responses from multiple sensors.
Additionally, the response of any particular sensor is non-linear, falling o as the concentration of an odorant
to which it responds nears its saturation level. This data set, however, does not exhibit sensor drift; the
real sensors on which this data set is modeled have been designed to eliminate this problem associated with
earlier sensor technology. The data were also generated with sensor response values in the range [0,1], so
rescaling was not necessary.

4.2 Classication Methods

The classication approach taken in this paper involves three steps: preprocessing, feature selection, and
classication. As noted above, the target odorants are presented in the presence of a signicant background,
so before the sensor responses can be used in classication this background must be removed. See Figure
1 for an example of response data from one sensor before and after background subtraction. As can be
seen from the gure, the background response varies within a relatively narrow range, so to remove the
background we need to nd the upper boundary of this range, which is done according to Algorithm 1.
To select relevant features from among the 100 sensor responses, we implemented principal component

3

(a) First three components of training data

(b) First three components of testing data

Fig. 2: Principal component analysis of testing and training data after background subtraction. Each like-
colored ray of points represents a single olfactant at increasing concentrations.

analysis (PCA). We noted that while the training set would be assumed present in its entirety, and hence
would be available for PCA decomposition, the training set is assumed to be presented one element at a
time. Consequently, we approached PCA by nding the principal components of the training data, then
generating the PCA values of the testing data using the principal components found from the training data.
See gure 2 for a scatter plot of the rst three principal components of the training and testing data. As
is evident from the gure, PCA reveals some surprising structure to the data; many of the olfactants are
clearly visually separable in the training data as arcs of equally-spaced points pro jecting from a single origin.
This structure seemed to suggest that a SVM with an appropriate kernel and kernel parameters would easily
separate the olfactants in PCA-space, but the results did not support this conjecture.
The classication algorithms implemented for this pro ject are: a Naïve Bayes classier (NB), multiclass
support vector machines with linear (LSVM), sigmoid (SSVM), polynomial (PSVM) and radial basis function
(RSVM) kernels, and for comparison a bagged decision tree (BDT). NB was implemented in Matlab. After
signicant experimentation with various platforms, including CVX [18], SV M light [23], SV M struct , and
libSVM [6], the nal SVM testing was done using the Matlab interface to libSVM. The bagged decision tree
was implemented using the Matlab Statistics Toolbox. Results from each classier are presented below.
Since a standard SVM is really a two-class classier, several methods exist for using an SVM in a multi-
class scenario. We investigated the two that appear most often in the literature, one-versus-all (OVA) and
one versus one (OVO). In the OVA method, a classier is trained on each class, using the training examples
from that class as positive examples and all other training examples as negative examples. To classify a new
example, each of these classiers is run on the new example; the class of the new example is that of the
„ n
«
classier that returns the largest distance from the separating hyperplane. In the OVO method, also known
as max-wins-voting,
classiers are trained, each of which takes one class as positive and another class
2
as negative. To classify a new example, each classier is run, and a win is counted for each class selected
by its classier the opposing class. The new example is classied as belonging to the class with the largest
number of wins. There is signicant literature on the question of which method is more accurate (see, for
example, [24], [22], [13], [9], and [7]), but the results presented in these papers and particularly in the study by
Rifkin and Klautau [36] suggest that relative to the selection of kernel and kernel parameters the multiclass
classication method is insignicant. As a result, we used the OVO method, which is that implemented by
libSVM.

4

Classier
NB
LSVM
PSVM (degree 2)
PSVM (degree 3)
PSVM (degree 4)
RSVM
SSVM
BDT

Test Accuracy Optimal parameters Best CV accuracy
68.6%
N/A
N/A
81.75%
43.65%
C = 27
C = 213 γ = 2−7
82.0%
43.6%
C = 213 γ = 2−5
42.6%
82.0%
C = 213 γ = 2−5
82.0%
42.1%
C = 213 γ = 2−5
82.4%
42.9%
C = 215 γ = 2−7
79.95%
43.9%
67.0%
50 trees
N/A

Tab. 1: Classier results

4.3 Classier Selection and Evaluation

Each classier was trained on the 2000-sample training set. Additionally, for the SVM classiers, extensive
cross-validation (CV) analysis was done to search for an eective combination of parameters. Two CV
methods were evaluated. In the rst method, which we refer to as leave-one-concentration-out cross validation
(LOCO-CV), twenty CV iterations were done, leaving out a dierent concentration level from each olfactant
on each iteration. The classier was trained each time on the remaining 1900 training examples and tested
on the 100 examples left out. The second method was a standard randomized 5-fold cross-validation (R5-
CV), in which the data was randomly divided into ve groups, one of which was left out and used as the
cross-validation set on each iteration. While these CV methods seem to oer substantially dierent methods
of evaluating the classiers, the results of both were substantially similar. As a consequence, for consistency
the results presented below all use classiers evaluated with R5-CV.

5 Results

The classication results for each of the tested classiers are presented in Table 1. Although all the SVM
classiers demonstrated approximately 80% cross-validation accuracy, their generalization error was signi-
cantly higher than predicted by cross-validation. The boosted decision tree achieved good results, but the
best results were achieved by the NB classier.
The results presented above all use data after background subtraction, but without PCA decomposition.
Despite the apparent structure of the data when separated into principal components, using data after PCA
decomposition actually decreased the accuracy of all classiers tested. Furthermore, we investigated using
a geometric curve-tting technique to identify the arcs visible in the PCA plot, but it is not clear how to
translate the parameters for such an arc from the testing data space to the training data space.

6 Conclusion and Further Research

Previous work in this area, particularly that in [8], suggested that a SVM classier should produce good
classication results for olfactory sensor data. Our results did not conrm this hypothesis, but neither
should they be understood as an invalidation of the hypothesis. Instead, these results should be understood as
conrmation that the implementation and tuning of SVM classiers poses signicant technical and conceptual
challenges, even when using a pre-existing SVM implementation, which were not fully surmounted during
the course of this research pro ject. The multitude of applications for an accurate and precise olfactory
classier clearly warrants further research into this area. Future iterations of this research pro ject will
attempt to understand more fully the shortcomings of the SVM classiers implemented in this pro ject, as
well as investigating other background extraction and feature selection methods and classiers.

5

7 Acknowledgements

This pro ject would not have been possible without the coooperation and support of Paul Rhodes and Evolved
Machines, who provided the problem description and data set as well as helpful advice throughout the pro ject.
Thanks are also due to Morgan Quigley, whose suggestions for research directions were invaluable at each
stage of this research.

References

[1] Darpa realnose program. http://www.darpa.mil/dso/thrusts/bio/biologically/realnose/index.htm.

[2] S. Baker, G. G. Roberts, and M. C. Petty. Phthalocyanine langmuir blodgett-lm gas detector. IEEE
Proceedings I: Solid State and Electron Devices, 130(5):260263, 1983.

[3] Jin Ho Bang, Sung H Lim, Erwin Park, and Kenneth S Suslick. Chemically responsive nanoporous
pigments: colorimetric sensor arrays and the identication of aliphatic amines. Langmuir : the ACS
journal of surfaces and col loids, 24(22):1316872, 2008.

[4] S. Bashyal, G. K. Venayagamoorthy, and B. Paudel. Embedded neural network for re classication
using an array of gas sensors.
In Sensors Applications Symposium, 2008. SAS 2008. IEEE, pages
146148, Feb. 2008.

[5] Rossella Blatt, Andrea Bonarini, Elisa Calabró, Matteo Torre, Matteo Matteucci, and Ugo Pastorino.
Fuzzy k-nn lung cancer identication by an electronic nose. In Applications of Fuzzy Sets Theory, volume
4578, page 261. 2007.

[6] Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin. LIBSVM: a library for support vector machines, 2001. Software
available at http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/ cjlin/libsvm.

[7] Can Demirkesen and Hocine Cheri. A comparison of multiclass svm methods for real world natural
scenes. 5259:752, 2008.

[8] Cosimo Distante, Nicola Ancona, and Pietro Siciliano. Support vector machines for olfactory signals
recognition. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 88(1):3039, 2003.

[9] Kai-bo Duan and S. Sathiya Keerthi. Which is the best multiclass svm method?: An empirical study.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Workshop on Multiple Classier Systems, pages 278285, 2005.

[10] D. Dumitrescu, B. Lazzerini, and F. Marcelloni. Olfactory signal classication based on evolutionary
computation.
In IJCNN'99. International Joint Conference on Neural Networks. Proceedings (Cat.
No.99CH36339), page 313, 1999.

[11] D. Dumitrescu, B. Lazzerini, and F. Marcelloni. A fuzzy hierarchical classication system for olfactory
signals. Pattern Analysis & Applications, 3(4):325, 2000.

[12] A. M. Fard. A study of semiconductor sensors for an electronic olfactory system. MSc Thesis, University
of Warwick, 1985.

[13] V. Franc and V. Hlavac. Multi-class support vector machine. In Object recognition supported by user
interaction for service robots, page 236, 2002.

[14] Walter Freeman. Olfactory system: odorant detection and classication, volume III. Academic Press,
New York, 1999.

[15] Jun Fu, Guang Li, Yuqi Qin, and Walter J. Freeman. A pattern recognition method for electronic noses
based on an olfactory neural network. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 125(2):489, 2007.

[16] J W Gardner, E L Hines, and M Wilkinson. Application of articial neural networks to an electronic
olfactory system. Measurement Science and Technology, 1(5):446, 1999.

6

[17] Julian W. Gardner, James A. Covington, Su-Lim Tan, and Timothy C. Pearce. Towards an articial
olfactory mucosa for improved odour classication. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 463(2083):1713, 2007.

[18] Michael Grant, Stephen Boyd, and Yinyu Ye. Cvx: Matlab software for disciplined convex programming.
http://cvxr.com/cvx, December 2009.

[19] Agustín Gutiérrez and Santiago Marco, editors. Biological ly Inspired Signal Processing for Chemical
Sensing, volume 188 of Studies in Computational Intel ligence. Springer, 2009.

[20] R. Gutierrez-Osuna. Pattern analysis for machine olfaction: a review. Sensors Journal, IEEE, 2(3):189
202, Jun 2002.

[21] E. L. Hines, J. W. Gardner, and R. N. Stanseld. A standalone neural network based electronic nose. In
DSP (Digital Signal Processing) in Instrumentation, IEE Col loquium on (Digest No.009), pages 101,
Jan 1992.

[22] Chih-Wei Hsu and Chih-Jen Lin. A comparison of methods for multiclass support vector machines. IEEE
transactions on neural networks / a publication of the IEEE Neural Networks Council, 13(2):41525,
2002.

[23] T. Joachims. Making large-scale svm learning practical. In B. Schölkopf, C. Burges, and A. Smola,
editors, Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vector Learning. MIT Press, 1999.

[24] Laine Kahsay, Friedhelm Schwenker, and Günther Palm. Comparison of multiclass svm decomposition
schemes for visual ob ject recognition. 3663:334, 2005.

[25] Tae Hyun Kim, Sang Hun Lee, Joohyung Lee, Hyun Seok Song, Eun Hae Oh, Tai Hyun Park, and
Seunghun Hong. Single-carbon-atomic-resolution detection of odorant molecules using a human olfactory
receptor-based bioelectronic nose. Advanced Materials, 21(1):91, 2009.

[26] Barry K Lavine, Charles E Davidson, Curt Breneman, and William Kaat. Genetic algorithms for
classication of olfactory stimulants. Methods Mol. Biol., 275:399426, May 2004.

[27] B. Lazzerini, A. Maggiore, and F. Marcelloni. Fros: a fuzzy logic-based recogniser of olfactory signals.
Pattern Recognition, 34(11):22152226, 2001.

[28] Xu Li, Guang Li, Le Wang, and Walter Freeman. Study of a bionic pattern classier based on olfactory
neural system. Journal of Bionics Engineering, (2):133140, 2004.

[29] Amy Lout, Silvia Coradeschi, Achim j. Lilienthal, and Javier Gonzalez. Gas distribution mapping of
multiple odour sources using a mobile robot. Robotica, 27(2):311319, 2009.

[30] Mehmet K. Muezzinoglu, Alexander Vergara, Ramón Huerta, Thomas Nowotny, Nikolai Rulkov, Henry
D. I. Abarbanel, Allen I. Selverston, and Mikhail I. Rabinovich. Articial olfactory brain for mixture
identication. In NIPS, pages 11211128, 2008.

[31] H.T. Nagle, R. Gutierrez-Osuna, and S.S. Schiman. The how and why of electronic noses.
Spectrum, 35(9):22, 1998.

IEEE

[32] E. Neuhaus and H. Hatt. Mimicking the olfactory system for the classication of chemical data. Trends
in Biotechnology, 26(7):347349, July 2008.

[33] Carey E. Priebe. Advanced data analysis methods for analyte recognition from optical sensor arrays.
1998.

[34] Baranidharan Raman. Sensor-based machine olfaction with neuromorphic models of the olfactory system.
PhD thesis, College Station, TX, USA, 2005. Adviser-Gutierrez-Osuna, Ricardo.

7

[35] Baranidharan Raman, Ping A Sun, Agustin Gutierrez-Galvez, and Ricardo Gutierrez-Osuna. Processing
of chemical sensor arrays with a biologically inspired model of olfactory coding. IEEE transactions on
neural networks / a publication of the IEEE Neural Networks Council, 17(4):101524, 2006.

[36] Ryan Rifkin and Aldebaro Klautau. In defense of one-vs-all classication. J. Mach. Learn. Res., 5:101
141, 2004.

[37] H Shurmer, A Fard, J Barker, P Bartlett, G Dodd, and U Hayat. Development of an electronic nose.
Physics in Technology, 18(4):170, 1987.

[38] H. V. Shurmer. An electronic nose: a sensitive and discriminating substitute for a mammalian olfactory
system. Circuits, Devices and Systems, IEE Proceedings G, 137(3):197204, Jun 1990.

[39] Zu Soh, T. Tusji, N. Takiguchi, and T. Tsuji. Neuro-based olfactory model for estimation of sensory
characteristic of mice. In 2008 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, page 431,
2009.

[40] Jon M. Sutter and Peter C. Jurs. Neural network classication and quantication of organic vapors
based on uorescence data from a ber-optic sensor array. Analytical Chemistry, 69(5):856, 1997.

[41] Victor V Sysoev, Bradly K Button, Kelly Wepsiec, Serghei Dmitriev, and Andrei Kolmakov. Toward the
nanoscopic "electronic nose": hydrogen vs carbon monoxide discrimination with an array of individual
metal oxide nano- and mesowire sensors. Nano Lett., 6(8):15848, 2006.

[42] N. Taguchi. British patent no. 1 257 155, 1971.

[43] R. H. Tredgold, M. C. J. Young, P. Hodge, and A. Hoorfar. Gas sensors made from langmuir-blodgett
lms of porphyrins. Solid-State and Electron Devices, IEE Proceedings I, 132(3):151156, June 1985.

[44] Le Wang, Guang Li, Xi Liu, Bao jun Wang, and W J Freeman. Study of a chaotic olfactory neural
network model and its applications on pattern classication. Conference proceedings : ... Annual In-
ternational Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society. Conference, 4:36403, 2005.

[45] Y Yao, W Freeman, B Burke, and Q Yang. Pattern recognition by a distributed neural network: An
industrial application. Neural Networks, 4(1):103, 1991.

[46] Hyeonseok Yoon, Sang*Hun Lee, Oh*Seok Kwon, Hyun*Seok Song, Eun*Hae Oh, Tai*Hyun Park, and
Jyongsik Jang. Polypyrrole nanotubes conjugated with human olfactory receptors: High-performance
transducers for fet-type bioelectronic noses. Angewandte Chemie, 121(15):2793, 2009.

8

