Inferring Passenger Boarding and Alighting Preference for
the Marguerite Shuttle Bus System

Adrian Albert

Abstract

We analyze passenger count data from the Marguerite Shuttle system operating on the Stanford University campus. The
aim is to infer the time-varying passenger alighting and boarding preference across stops for several important shuttle
routes. We look at the problem from the perspective of ﬁlling in the missing entries of a transit route O-D matrix. A
preliminary analysis indicates that there are certain trips (e.g., the Quarry Welch Rd - Med School Quarry) that are
preferred by passengers.

1 Introduction and motivation

Stanford is undergoing a large eﬀort for reducing the its traﬃc-associated environmental footprint. Taking
part in this campus-wide initiative, the P&TS collaborates with the Information Systems Lab in the Electrical
Engineering department to investigate possibilities for increasing energy eﬃciency of the Marguerite Shuttle
system1 . This can be achieved through bus allocation strategies for the various routes that better take into
account passenger rideship preference.
Marguerite shuttles are equipped with devices that allow P&TS to accurately assess the number of passengers
boarding and alighting at each stop in the Marguerite system (see Section 4). However it is not currently possible
to determine how many of the passengers that board at one stop choose to alight at another (given) stop.
An estimate of passenger preference for the various stops in the system based on temporal factors (such as
day of week or month of year) or on historical factors (special events, construction sites, etc.) may aid P&TS in
e.g., planning the number of busses allocated for particular routes at diﬀerent times. In addition, an assessment
on the number of people riding the bus in between diﬀerent stops could contribute to estimating and predicting
spatial and temporal information of overcrowding on the Marguerite.
In this paper we focus our attention on one of the main lines in the Marguerite system, the A Line. This
line runs on weekdays and has 36 stops, starting from (and ending at) the Palo Alto Transit Center, where the
buses station for up to 10 minutes.

2 Problem formulation

Let us consider the case of one Marguerite shuttle completing one full trip (route), meaning it starts from a
certain initial stop, visits other stops on the way, and ends at the same stop it started from. We are interested
to infer the distribution across stops of the number of people who boarded at a certain stop and alighted at
another (given) stop, for all stops along a given line, given the boarding and alighting passenger counts for each
stop along that line (in the present paper, the A Line ). We may assume that the bus completes an integer
number of routes per day, and after each route the bus has no passengers left on.
Mathematically, this is equivalent to ﬁnding individual entries of a m × m square matrix (with m the total
number of stops on the respective line) when only the row and column sums are known. The matrix N columns
and rows represent the individual stops Si , with i ∈ {1, 2, ..., m}, and Nij = number of people boarding at stop
i who alight at stop j . As it is immediately apparent, the row sum for row i is the total numberve of people bi
Nij = bi and (cid:88)
(cid:88)
boarding at stop Si , whereas the column sum for column j is the total number of people aj alighting at stop
Sj :
j
i
This problem is illustrated in Table 2. Above we assumed that no passengers board at the ﬁnal stop (bm = 0)
or alight at the initial stop (a1 = 0). While the ai ’s and bi ’s are observable, the Nij ’s are not and need to be
inferred. By deﬁnition, Nij = 0 for all i ≥ j , since in this case no people have yet boarded at stop i who can
alight at j . This is the well-known transit route Origin-Destination (O-D) problem.

Nij = aj .

(1)

1 Stanford University’s free public transportation service

1

3 Approach

Stop

S1
S2
S3
...
Sm−1
Sm
Origin
(boards)

S1

0
0
0
...
0
0
b1

S2

N1,2
0
0
...
0
0
b2

S3

N1,3
N2,3
0
...
0
0
b3

...

. . .
. . .
. . .
...
. . .
. . .
. . .

Sm−1

N1,m−1
N2,m−1
N3,m−1
...
0
0
bm−1

Sm

N1,m
N2,m
N3,m
...
Nm−1,m
0
bm

2

Destination
(alights)
a1
a2
a3
...
am−1
am

Tab. 1: Transit route Origin-Destination (OD) matrix problem. The alight counts ai and board counts bi are
...m, j ∈ 1,
...m are not.
observable, while the transition counts Nij (i ∈ 1,

3 Approach

The problem of ﬁlling an Origin-Destination matrix is highly underspeciﬁed, whereby there are many unknown
entries and only a few observations. For a given set of observed values of row and column sums there are
arbitrarily many solutions, and solving for integer entries is NP-hard.
There are many approaches in the literature that attempt to ﬁll in the matrix elements Nij using linear
algebra-based approaches, such as the balancing method proposed by [Lamond and Stuart, 1981]. There, a seed
O-D matrix (with known entries obtained, e.g., from historical data) is transformed by iteratively multiplying
each entry in a row with a certain number, such that the row sum matches the observed count. The disadvantage
of such linear algebraic methods is that they do not have a natural way to incorporate prior information, and
only look at a “snapshots” of the routes independently of eachother.
A dynamic approached is adopted by [Hazelton, 2008], who looks at inference for O-D matrices for the
time-varying case. For a sequence of daily counts, they describe the day-to-day evolution of O-D matrices using
a model of the day-to-day structural change in the matrix (e.g., weekday vs. week-end). The model parameters
are learned using Bayesian inference on the time series data.
In the following we build upon a recent study by [Li, 2009], which we outline below.

3.1 A Markov Decision Model
[Li, 2009] break down the transit route O-D matrix ﬁlling problem into two parts: the estimation step and the
reconstruction step.
In the estimation step we make the important observation that a passenger boarding at Sj can alight at
Si only if he is onboard at stop Si−1 . We assume that the transition probability for stop Si will depend only on
the passenger’s status at a small number of stops Sk , Sk+1 , ..., Si−1 , for some k ∈ {1, 2...i − 1}. This motivates
the use of a Markov chain model (MCM) to express transition probabilities.
For the sake of simplicity, in a ﬁrst stage we look at a ﬁrst order MCM. Deﬁning the random variable ξi by
ξi = 1, if a passenger is on board at stop i, and ξi = 0, if the passenger is not on board at stop i, the Markov
transition probabilities become:

(2)

P r{ξi = 0|ξi−1 = 1} = qi
P r{ξi = 1|ξi−1 = 1} = 1 − qi ,
for i = 2, . . . , m − 1. Above, qi is the probability that a passenger alights at stop i given that they are onboard
at stop i − 1. It is shown in [Li, 2009] that the transition preference probability distribution across stops is
j−1(cid:89)
given by:
(1 − qk )(j = i + 2, . . . , m).
pi,i+1 = qi+1 and pij = qj
k=i+1
In the reconstruction step we use the obtained preference probability distribution to calculate the entries
of the sought OD matrix: (cid:100)Nij = pij bi , (i = 1, . . . , m − 1; j = i + 1, . . . , m),
and (cid:100)Nij = 0 if i ≥ j .
3.2 Bayesian inference
assumption and that aj ∼ Bin((cid:80)j−1
In order to infer the Markov parameters qj (j = 1, . . . , m), [Li, 2009] propose that qj ∼ beta(αj , βj ). Using this
k=1 (bk − ak ), qj ) (since the transition process is Markov, see [Li, 2009]), one

(3)

(4)

4 Data processing and inspection

3

Count type
boarding
boarding
alighting
boarding

Count
2
1
54
43

Stop Label
Quarry HooverPv
MedicalC Quarry
PaloAlto TransC
PaloAlto TransC

Date time
07/31/2008 19:54:28
07/31/2008 19:50:58
07/31/2008 19:47:32
07/31/2008 19:47:32

Line name
A Line
A Line
A Line
A Line
...
Tab. 2: Marguerite data for the A Line (excerpt). For example, 54 people alighted at the Palo Alto Transit
Center on the 31st of July, 2008, 19:47:32, and 43 people boarded at that stop on bus 8.
(cid:32)
(cid:33)
αj + βj +

arrives at the following estimate on qj :

Stop Id
101
74
66
66

Bus Id
8
8
8
8

j−1(cid:88)
(bk − ak )
k=1

ˆqj = (αj + aj )/

, j = 2, . . . , m − 1

(5)

The Bayesian framework allows for incorporation of prior information, which is eﬀectively the learning process
through which the initial non-informative priors (αj = βj = 1) can be updated to reﬂect the new information
after solving the OD estimation problem for a training set of routes. We leave this aspect for a future study,
and concentrate here on the simpler approach of calculating the aggregate estimate of the whole set of routes
with non-informative priors.

4 Data processing and inspection

4.1 Data retrieval
The P&TS provided access to the Marguerite Shuttle data, which was in the form of several tens of SQL/ODBC
tables stored remotely on the servers of a contractor company. A fair amount of interfacing with P&TS and the
contractor was necessary in order to obtain the permissions for VPN access. We used commercial database and
spreadsheet software (MS Access and Excel) for inspecting the myriad tables available, constructing queries on
variables of interest across multiple tables and exporting results into a text format easily accessible to Matlab.
An excerpt from a sample ﬁle obtained after processing is presented in Table 2.

4.2 Extracting route information
Extracting route information from the P&TS data proved to be particularly challenging, owing to the sheer
volume and format complexity of the available information, and to “imperfections” in the data relative to the
assumptions of the OD matrix ﬁlling problem. For example, counts were not available for certain stops or
periods of time, there were multiple counts taken at the same time for certain stops and buses, or routes were
recorded to start at stops other than the designated initial stop. Also, the P&TS tables centralized counts from
all buses in service (averaging 8-10 at most times for the A Line only), which meant that for mining the data
to extract routes we needed to keep track of the progress of every bus along the line.
Our inspection of the data suggests that counts at the initial (and thus end-route) stop are especially sensitive
to error sources such as the ones outlined above. For example, at the ﬁnal stop a bus stations for a longer period
of time, during which several readings are taken (both alights and boards), which usually are large compared to
the ones at other stops along the line. It may also happen that passengers choose to board a few stops before
the end stop, and remain on the bus while it stations at the end stop, continuing their journey thereafter. In
bj − m(cid:88)
D ≡ m(cid:88)
particular, eﬀects like these lead the total passenger count deﬁcit for some completed trips,
j=1
j=1
to take values D (cid:54)= 0, which contradicts a key assumption of the transit route OD problem.

(6)

aj ,

We sequentially parse the pre-processed data to extract route information, storing information in a bus queue
as we proceed (see Algorithm 12). Our implementation uses a state machine and a queue for keeping track of
the stops visited by each bus, and of the routes completed, and thus is fairly robust to any change in the order
of which the count readings are processed. When a route is signaled to have ended with a non-zero passenger
deﬁcit, we divide up the value of last count (either board or alight ) between the last stop of the completing
route and the ﬁrst stop of the new route such that the last route had a total value of D = 0 (the balancing step
in Algorithm 12).
We believe that, by far, the eﬀect that plagues most our analysis is the non-zero value of the passenger
deﬁcit D for many of the routes. To obtain an intuition of how the deﬁcit varies with time for the interval

5 Preliminary analysis

4

Input: count readings (time series) as a matrix of the form in Table 2
Output: completed routes (time series) in the form given in Table 2

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

Initialize bus queue
foreach count reading do
if current stop (cid:54)= last stop in route then
queue = push(queue, current stop info)
end
else
completed route = pop(queue)
balance last count between completed route and new route to satisfy Eq. (6)
Set route to transit route OD format as in Table 2
• assign time stamp to each route as average time of visits to stops

10

11

12

Store completed route in routes array
end
end
Sort routes chronologically according to time stamp
Algorithm 1: Algorithm for extracting route information from pre-processed counts data.

Fig. 1: Passenger count deﬁcit D for the week of Febru-
ary 5th , 2008. The deﬁcit has two peaks around
8:00AM and 6:00PM, and is small around noon.

Fig. 2: Markov parameters q accross stops in the A Line
(time-averaged). By construction, at the second-
to-last stop q36 = 1 and at the initial stop q1 = 0.

considered we created plots such as the one in Figure 1. Such a plot can be useful as a crude measure of the
conﬁdence in the estimate on the preference probability matrix P when considering variations on time scales
such as hour-of-day.

5 Preliminary analysis

Implementing the approach presented in Section 3 is fairly straightforward: for each completed route obtained
as described in Section 4 we estimate the Markov parameters q using Equation 5, which we use to infer the
preference probability matrix P. The entries of the OD matrix N are calculated using Equation 4. In a ﬁrst
analysis we use non-informative priors, and take the time-averages of quantities of interest for the considered
interval (January-April 2008). During this interval there were 3236 complete trips on the A Line.
We plot the time-averaged Markov model parameters qj obtained with non-informative priors αj = βj = 1
in Figure 2. As the model requires (see Section 3), at the second-to-last stop q36 = 1 and at the initial stop
q1 = 0. On average, people who board around the 5-th stop (Quarry Welch Rd ) will tend to remain on the bus
for more than one stop with a probability of 20%, while people who board between stops 10 and 15 (SerraM
MainQuad through Serra S CampusW ) will only stay on the bus for after the next stop with a 10% probability.
In Figure 3 we illustrate the preference probability matrix estimate P, computed with non-informative priors
αj = βj = 1, and time-averaged for January-April 2008. For this period, people who board at stop 5-8 (Quarry
Welch Rd through ViaOrtega Serra ) have a 35% preference probability of alighting at the next stop or staying

05/02−1001020304050Date [DD/MM]|Deficit|Passenger Count Deficit051015202530354000.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.91Markov parameters q (time−averaged)Stopq6 Conclusions and Future Work

5

on the bus until stop 20 (Olmsted Wel lsly ). People boarding from stop 6 through 27 (Quarry MedCent - Serra
BurnhamPa ) have a similar preference probability of 35% of alighting at stop 29 (Serra Mal l Oval ) or stop 32
(MedSchoo Quarry ). Also, people seem to have higher preference (≥ 50%) to alight at the latter stop if they
boarded at the former.

6 Conclusions and Future Work

Motivated by the problem of increasing
energy eﬃciency for the Marguerite Shut-
tle by better allocation of buses, we an-
alyzed passenger count data for the A
Line from January through March 2008
to determine passenger preference prob-
ability of boarding and alighting accross
stops.
To solve the associated tran-
sit route Origin-Destination (OD) ma-
trix ﬁlling problem, we used an ap-
proach based on a ﬁrst-order Markov
model an on Bayesian analysis. The bulk
of our eﬀort until now went into pre-
processing the data and parsing it to ex-
tract complete OD trips.
Interesting in-
sights oﬀered by a preliminary analysis
using non-informative priors include, e.g.,
that passengers have high preference of
alighting at the Medical School Quarry,
if they boarded at the Quarry Welch
Rd.

Fig. 3: Preference probability matrix with non-informative priors
(time-averaged for January-April 2008).

We plan to continue working on this problem to extend the approach outlined in Section 3 as follows:
• Incorporate Bayesian learning: treat part of the data as “training set”, then use learned parameters as
priors for subsequent analysis on remaining data;
• Replace ﬁrst order Markov model with a higher order model, as ﬁrst order MCM tends to give preference
to very short trips (one stop);
• Investigate temporal distribution of passenger preference probability by dividing up the data in time
intervals of interest and analyzing each interval separately. For this we plan to incorporate the time-varying
model of [Hazelton, 2008] with the (seemingly static) Markov chain model of passenger boarding/alighting
probability proposed pursued in this paper.

Acknowledgements. The author would like to thank Prof. Bala ji Prabhakar, Deepak Marugu, and Seewong
Ou from the Electrical Engineering Department, and Catie Chang from the Computer Science Department at
Stanford for fruitful discussions and suggestions. We are grateful to Ramses Madou and Angus Davol from the
Stanford Parking & Transportation Services for providing access to the Marguerite Shuttle data and helpful
hints about processing it.

References

[Hazelton, 2008] Hazelton, M. L. (2008). Statistical inference for time varying origin-destination matrices.
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 42(6):542 – 552.

[Lamond and Stuart, 1981] Lamond, B. and Stuart, N. F. (1981). Bregman’s balancing method. Transportation
Research B, 15(4):239–248.

[Li, 2009] Li, B. (2009). Markov models for bayesian analysis about transit route origin-destination matrices.
Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 43(3):301–310.

