Generalized Neutral Portfolio

Sandeep Bhutani
bhutanister@gmail.com

December 10, 2009

Abstract

An asset allocation framework decomposes the universe of asset returns into factors either by
Fundamental Analysis, Factor Analysis or Principal Component Analysis. Asset allocation methods
then attempt to neutralize the sensitivity of the portfolio to a select factor. However, Factor Analysis or
PCA fail to take into account moments higher than the second moment. This paper outlines a method
based on Independent Component analysis to eﬀectively neutralize a portfolio to a component. This
method is illustrated for building a market neutral portfolio in the Mean variance framework, and can
be extended to encompass any factor(s).

1 Introduction

Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) postulates that any stock return can be decomposed into a linear
combination of a return component correlated to the Market Portfolio and an idiosyncratic component. This
simpliﬁed model can be used to design a portfolio which is insensitive to market gyrations, but still has a
positive return. A simpliﬁed example is the pairs trading method: A pair of highly correlated stocks are
chosen and the trader goes long the cheaper stock and short the expensive stock to create a market neutral
pair. This pair has zero correlation with the market. The method of pairs trading can be generalized to
create a linear combination of arbitrary stocks which gives a net market exposure of zero.

The pairs trading method can be generalized by decomposing a stock speciﬁc return into various factors.
The factors could be fundamentals based, which include for instance, market capitalization, industry/sector,
rankings, analyst ratings etc. Or the factors can be determined by statistical techniques like Factor Analysis,
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to determine the dominant return factors. Then a portfolio manager
can neutralize his/her portfolio to a chosen factor based on his/her beliefs or alpha model. This is achieved
by the Portfolio optimization technique which minimizes the variance of the returns of the portfolio for a
desired return, under the budget and factor neutrality constraints.

The method of using PCA with variance minimization considers only the ﬁrst two moments, mean and
variance. Factor analysis makes a Gaussian assumption which is routinely violated by the stock returns.
The market returns are negatively skewed and fat-tailed. We saw an evidence of the higher moments in the
past year (2008) when the market-neutral hedge funds suﬀered with the drop in the market.

To overcome the Gaussian distribution assumption, this paper proposes to modify the method of extracting
factors using Independent Component Analysis to decompose the stock returns into factors. The resulting
factors would be from independent distributions and not just uncorrelated. Then using Mutual Information
as a metric of similarity the Independent factor corresponding to Market would be identiﬁed and used as a

1

constraint in portfolio optimization. The resulting return proﬁle is shown to be independent of the market
by using the Mutual Information metric.

The next section describes existing work in explaining stock returns by means of Independent Component
Analysis. The followng section describes the data used for the study, which is followed by a simpliﬁed
mean variance optimization solution. We then describe the PCA and ICA formulations which are followed
by the evidence based on our analysis of the stock returns data. The analysis section demonstrates the
ineﬀectiveness of neutralizing the portfolio to the market using only the second moments. Additionally by
using ICA it demonstrates the market neutrality of the resulting portfolio weights.

2 Existing Work

Back and Weigend in [1] made ﬁrst use of Independent Component Analysis in analysing stock returns. They
applied it to the daily returns of the 28 of the largest Japanese stocks and used ICA factors as explanatory
variables for the stock market. A very similar approach was used by Siu-Ming Cha and Lai-Wan Chan in [2]
to analyze the returns of the Hang Sheng market. Their primary purpose too was to explain the underlying
data generating process of the stock returns. An innovative use of ICA to analyze hedge fund returns can
be found in [4] where Jan uses ICA to explain the factors driving the hedge fund returns of a select group
of hedge fund managers and demonstrates superiority over using PCA for attribution analysis. Analysis of
S&P500 returns in [5] about the non-normality of stock returns by Weigend et al serves as the motivation
for this paper.

3 Data

The data used for this problem was obtained from the Fama French website [3]. The website contains daily
returns for a set of ten portfolios which seggregate the US stock universe based on the size of the companies.
Each one of these portfolios is treated as one asset for the purpose of this paper. The market returns are
determined by the daily returns on the index SPY and downloaded from Yahoo. The period of study is
from February 2, 1993 to September 30, 2009.

4 A note on Mutual Information metric

As the goal of this pro ject is to demonstrate that the resulting distribution of returns is independent of
the market returns, we need a metric that will work on distributions. Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test can
be used to compare distributions, however it can not determine whether the given distribution is part of
the mixture. Kullback Leibler (KL) Divergence would tell us if the two distributions are independent, but
the KL divergence can not be used as a metric since it does not obey triangle inequality, which prevents
it from being used to compare non-zero KL divergences. There is a method based on KL Divergence, the
Mutual Information metric [7] which obeys triangle inequality, and is a true metric. This is the method we
use in this paper as this allows us to determine when two distributions are independent and if they are not
independent, the one with the larger metric shows greater dependence.

2

5 Modern Portfolio Theory

Asset allocation in the modern portfolio theory [6] is achieved by determining the weights on each of the
assets to maximize the total return while minimizing the risk under a given budget constraint. For a
vector of portfolio weights of assets denoted by w, return vector R, asset covariance matrix Σ, the portfolio
optimization is deﬁned as a solution to:

min wT Σw − λRT w
m(cid:88)
i=1

wi = 1

s t :

(5.1)

The covariance matrix is created by cov(R), where R is a matrix of return vectors corresponding to each
asset. Additional constraints can be included in (5.1) based on the portfolio design requirements.

6 Principal Component Analysis

For PCA we determine the zero based auto-correlation matrix and then use the princomp in MATLAB to
determine the components. We form portfolios corresponding to each one of the Principal Components and
compare the returns of these portfolios to the Market Portfolio using the Mutual Information metric. The
component with the largest Mutual Information (the largest eigenvalue) corresponds to the Market. We
modify (5.1) to include this constraint:

RT wpca(i) = 0
which indicates that the returns corresponding to this component have to be zero. We then determine the
returns of the optimized portfolio and compute the eﬃcient frontier. The set of returns computed are once
again compared to the market using the Mutual Information metric. We ﬁnd the mutual information to be
non-zero in this case indicating that the returns are not indepdent of the market.

7

Independent Component Analysis

While there are several algorithms for Independent Component Analysis, we use the FastICA algorithm. We
compute the Independent Components and determine the component corresponding to the Market Portfolio
based on the Mututal Information metric. This is used to add the constraint to the (5.1):

RT wica(i) = 0

We once again compute the eﬃcient frontier of the new portfolio using ICA. We determine the mutual
information of the returns of the ICA portfolio and compare it to the mutual information of the returns of
the PCA.

8 Method and Results

This section illustrates the comparison of the eﬃcient frontier obtained by the three methods: Unconstrained
Optimization, Optimization with the domiant PCA eigenvector set to zero and Optimization with the

3

dominant ICA component set to zero. The choice of the component to neutralize for both ICA and PCA
was made by picking the component which had the highest Mutual Information with the returns to the
market. The constraint was implemented by regenerating the returns matrix by multiplying the original
returns matrix with a mixing matrix which had the dominant column set to zero for PCA and the dominant
row set to zero for ICA.

As expected, the PCA based returns have non-zero mutual information when compared to the market.
However, the Mutual Information of ICA constrained portfolio based returns is still non-zero albeit much
lower than the PCA based portfolio for the same level of returns. Another observation from the plots is
that the possible risk and returns from the ICA constrained portfolio are higher than the possible risk and
returns from the PCA constrained portfolio indicating that there is improvement to be gained by using an
ICA based method.

The eﬃcient frontier shows that the returns from the unconstrained portfolio are higher than the constrained
returns owing the presence of the market which is expected since the ICA and PCA portfolios can’t make
use of the market. A striking result of the eﬃcient frontier is that the unconstrained results have a minimum
with respect to the Mutual information to the market which indicates another possibility of achieving a
market neutral portfolio. To test this, we tried optimizing the orignal equation (5.1) with the constraint
that the mutual information with respect to the market be zero and that fails to converge in MATLAB.

9 Conclusion

This paper illustrates a method for creating a generalized neutral portfolio to a component based on using
Indepdent Component Analysis as a constraint in the Markowitz Portfolio Theory framework. The resulting
portfolio returns are evaluated for their mutual information with the market and the results from an ICA
based constraint have lower mutual information with the market when compared to a PCA based constraint.
Furthermore, ICA based results give access to a higher range of return/risk values than the PCA based
methods enabling higher returns from existing portfolios. This kind of portfolio formulation can be extended
to include any other factor or a set of factors. An added beneﬁt of this formulation is that when we remove
the exposure to market distribution, we greatly reduce the higher moment exposure to our portfolio without
directly optimizing for it. This is something that we expect to demonstrate in future work.

4

References

[1] Andrew D. Back and Andreas S. Weigend. A ﬁrst application of independent component analysis to
extracting structure from stock returns. Working Paper IS-97-22, 1997.

[2] Siu-Ming CHA and Lai-Wan CHAN. Applying independent component analysis to factor model in
ﬁnance. Intel ligent Data Engineering and Automated Learning - IDEAL 2000, Data Mining, Financial
Engineering, and Intel ligent Agents, pages 538–544, 2000.

[3] Kenneth R. French and Eugene Fama. Fama french portfolios.

[4] Jan Olszewski. Unraveling hedge fund returns: An introduction to independent component analysis as
an analytical tool. Available at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=884266, October 2006.

[5] Andreas S.Weigend and Shanming Shi. Predicting daily probability distributions of s&p500 returns.
Available at http://hd l.hand le.net/2451/14307, Aug 1998.

[6] Wikipedia. Modern portfolio theory. Available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern portfolio theory,
2009.

[7] Wikipedia. Mutual information. Available at http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutual information, 2009.

5

