SENTIMENT-­BASED	  MODEL	  FOR	  REPUTATION	  	  
SYSTEMS	  IN	  AMAZON	  	  
Milad Sharif msharif@stanford.edu 
Soheil Norouzi snorouzi@stanford.edu  

 

 

1. INTRODUCTION 

When  buyers  purchase  products  from  an  online  retailer  such  as  Amazon,  they  assess 

and  pay  not  only  for  the  product  they  want  but  also  for  packaging,  delivery,  and  the 

extent  to which  the  product  description matches  the  actual  product. On  the  other  hand, 

the  premium  price  a  merchant  can  demand  for  a  product  (relative  to  the  other 

merchants  selling  the  same  product)  is  highly  correlated  to  the  product  reviews.  With 

the growing number of websites such as Amazon and eBay  that allow users  to express 

their  experience,  costumer  reviews  will  play  a 

more  significant  role  in  the  reputation  of  the 

merchants.  

 

With  fast  growth  of  online  retailers,  developing 

tools  to  quantify  the  semantics  of  product 

reviews and deriving the polarity of opinions are 

attracting  significant  attention  over  the  last  few 

years.   One  approach  to  evaluate  the  strength 

of  an  opinion  is  using  reviews  with  numeric 

ratings and training (semi-)supervised learning algorithms to classify reviews as positive 

or  negative  [1].  However,  these  techniques  are  not  able  to  fully  incorporate  the 

sentiment  of  the  reviews.  In  another  approach  in  [2],  the  semantic  orientation  and 

strength  of  a  review  is  predicted  by  tracing  the  changes  in  the  associated  economic 

variables of a merchant. More specifically, the scheme used in [2] assigns a dollar value 

to  each  opinion  phrase  by  evaluating  the  effect  of  the  phrases  on  econometrics  like 

premium  price  a  merchant  can  ask  over  the  period  of  time.  [2]  assigns  a  score  to  the 

modifiers  that  the  buyers  used  in  the  reviews  and  characterizes  a  merchant  using  a 

vector  of  reputation  dimensions  representing  its  ability  on  each  of  dimensions  (i.e. 

shipping, packaging and so on).  

 

In  this  project,  we  used  two  different  binary  classifiers  (i.e.  Naïve  Bayes  and  semi-

supervised  recursive  auto-encoder)  to  predict  the  premium  price  of  a  product.  The 

sentiment  analysis  algorithm  (i.e.  RAE)  was  deployed  to  obtain  the  semantics  of  the 

product  reviews  and  provided  a model  for  the  premium  prices.  In  the  rest  of  the  report, 

details  of  the  two  classifiers  are  provided  followed  by  the  simulation  results  and  a 

comparison of the two. 

 

2. DATA COLLECTION 

We  used  the  data  set  provided  by  [2].  The  data  set  includes  details  of  the  9,500 

transactions  that  took  place  on  Amazon.com  for  280  different  software  products.  The 

data  set  collected  from  publicly  available  information  at Amazon.com  by  using Amazon 

Web Services  over  a  period  of  180  days,  between October  2004  and March  2005. The 

data set used in this project is available at http://economining.stern.nyu.edu. 

 

The  data  set  includes  two  parts,  transaction  history  and  reputation  data.  The  first  part 

consists  of  transaction  IDs for  each  product  and  the  price  at  which  the  products  were 

sold.  The  second  part  of  data  set  includes  the  reputation  history  of  each merchant  that 

had  a  product  for  sale  during  the  period which  the  data  set was  collected.  Additionally, 

for  each  of  the  competing  listings  for  identical  products,  we  have  the  listed  price  along 

with the competitors’ reputation. 

 

3. NAÏVE BAYES 

First,  multivariate  Bernoulli  event  model  with 

Laplace  smoothing  is  used  to  build  a  model  for 

premium prices based on the merchant reputation. 

Bag-of-words  representation  of  the  product  reviews 

is used for Naïve Bayes model. 

For  evaluating  the  performance  of  the  classifier  6-

fold  cross  validation  is  used.  The  average  accuracy 

of 77% is achieved by Naïve Bayes method. 

 

 

 

 

4. SEMI-SUPERVISED RECURSIVE AUTO-ENCODER 

In  order  to  exploit  hierarchical  structure  of  each  review, Semi-supervised Auto-Encoder 

(RAE)  is  used.  Illustration  of  RAE  architecture,  which  learns  semantic  vector 

representations of phrases, is given in the following figure. 

In  RAE  method  word  indices  are  first 

mapped  into  a  semantic  vector  space. 

Then  they  are  recursively  merged  by 

the  same  auto-encoder  network  into  a 

fixed  length  sentence  representation. 

The vectors at each node are used as 

features  to  predict  a  distribution  over 

sentiment labels. 

 

Similar to the other method cross 

validation method is used to evaluate the 

performance of RAE. As it shown in the 

following figure the average accuracy of 

85% is achieved by RAE which 

outperforms Naïve Bayes by almost 10%. 

Due to the lack of time we used the same 

optimal weight as in [3].  

 

Excellent	  	  	  	  	  	  Service.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Thank	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  you!	  

Another benefit of RAE is that rather than limiting sentiment to a positive/negative scale, 

multi-dimensional distribution over several sentiments can be predicted. This property 

could be used to predict whether the merchant is likely to sell the product or not. 

 

CONCLUSION 

We  used  different  binary  classification  models  to  accurately  predict  the  polarity  of  the 

premium  price  that  a  merchant  get  based  on  the  costumer  reviews.  Our  evaluation 

shows that RAE can predict these distributions more accurately than other models. 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We  like  to  thank  Richard  Socher  for  useful  discussions.  He  was  kind  of  enough  to 

provide use the simulation code for semi-supervised RAE. 

 

REFERENCES 

[1] B. Pang  and  L.  Lee.  2005. Seeing  stars: Exploiting  class  relationships  for  sentiment 

categorization with respect to rating scales. In ACL 2005. 

[2] A. Ghose, P.  Ipeirotis, and A. Sundararajan,  “Opinion Mining Using Econometrics: A 

Case  Study  on  Reputation  Systems”,  Proceedings  of  the  45th  Annual  Meeting  of  the 

Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2007) 

[3] Richard Socher,  Jeffrey Pennington, Eric Huang, Andrew Y. Ng, and Christopher D. 

Manning,  "Semi-Supervised  Recursive  Auto-encoders 

for  Predicting  Sentiment 

Distributions". EMNLP 2011 

