People Detection with DSIFT Algorithm 
By Bing Han, Dingyi Li and Jia Ji 

 
1 

 
Introduction 
 
People  detection  is  an  interesting  computer  vision  topic.  Locating  people  in  images  and  videos 
have  many  potential  applications,  such  as  human  computer  interaction  and  auto-focus  cameras.  There 
have  been  much  effort  on  developing  people  detection  algorithms,  and  among  them,  the  “Dense  Scale -
Invariant Feature Transform (DSIFT) [1]” algorithms appear  to be very effective. To  implement our own 
people  detection  program,  we  utilized  the  DSIFT  algorithm  to  extract  feature  vectors  from  images,  and 
used  Support  Vector  Machine  (SVM)  and  Naive  Bayes  algorithms  for  classification.   We  explored 
different imaging processing and machine learning techniques, and assessed their performance. 
 
Algorithms 
 
In this project, we used DSIFT algorithm for feature extraction, local averaging and local contrast 
normalization  for  feature  modification,  and  SVM  and  Naïve  Bayes  algorithm  model  training  and  
classification. 

2 

 

 
DSIFT  derives  from  SIFT  algorithm,  which  is  an  important  keypoint  based  approach.  Given  an 
image, SIFT finds all the keypoints in the image with respect to the gradient feature of each pixel. 
Every  keypoint  contains  the  information  of  its  location,  local  scale  and  orientation.  Then,  based 
on  each  keypoint,  SIFT  computes  a  local  image  descriptor which  shows  the  gradient  feature  in  the  local 
region  around  the  keypoint.  Combining  all  the  local  descriptors,  we  get   the  complete  features  from  the 
image. 

  

Testing ChainGaussianSmoothingTestingImageDSIFTcorrespondingModelsFeaturesDSIFT& localaveragingDSIFT& localContrastnormalizeClassificationResultBased  on  SIFT  algorithm,  dense  SIFT  makes  some  new  assumptions:  (a)  the  location  of  each 
keypoint  is  not  from  the  gradient  feature  of  the  pixel,  but  from  a  predesigned  location;  (b)  the  scale  of 
each  keypoint  is  all  the  same  which  is  also  predesigned;  (c)  the  orientation  of  each  keypoint  is  always 
zero. With this assumptions, DSIFT can acquire more feature in less time than SIFT does. 
  
Based  on  the  basic  DSIFT  algorithm,  we  also  explored  local  averaging  and  local  contrast 
normalization techniques. In the local averaging technique, we averaged every 4 x 4 block of local pixel’s 
descriptor,  and  got  one  averaged  descriptor  to  represent  the  entire  block.  Local  contrast  normalization 
normalized  the descriptors  locally  in  a 4 x 4 block  to make  the descriptor partially  invariant  to change  in 
illumination. 
  
After  extracting  the  features  in  training  images,  we  used  SVM  and  Naïve  Bayes  algorithms  to 
learn  several  models.  For  all  the  testing  images,  we  extract  their  features  with  the  same  method.  Then 
putting  these  features  into  the  corresponding  models  and  making  classifications,  we  acquired  the 
recognition result/detection rate. 
 
3 
 
3.1 

Data Selection 
Two  set  of  datasets  were  used  in  our  experiment.  First,  MIT’s  pedestrian  database,  which 
contains  924  pedestrian  images,  was  used  as  our  positive  samples  [3].  899  random  non -human  images 
from the Internet were selected as our negative samples. Second, a more challenging dataset called INRIA 
were  used  [4].  INRIA  consists  of  over  2000  images  that  can  possibly  contain  multiple  people  or  partial 
person with various backgrounds. The size of all samples  is 64 x 128 pixels. Figure 2 is a snapshot of the 
images. 
 
 

Experiment 

(b) 

 

(a) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    
Figure 2   (a) Top: MIT’s pedestrian images; Bottom: random images from Internet. 
     (b) Top: INRIA’s positive images; Bottom: INRIA’s negative images  

  
 
Implementation 
We generated a 1 x 772096 feature descriptor vector for each sample image with the Dense SIFT 
algorithm,  which  is  provided  by  the  VLFeat  [5]  open  source  library.  To  explore  the  performance,  we 

3.2  

 

tuned  our  algorithms  with  two  image  processing  techniques  separately,  which  are  local  contrast 
normalization  and  local averaging. Local contrast  normalization  normalizes  the descriptors  local ly  in  a  4 
x  4  block,  which  theoretically  will  robustify  our  algorithm  over  different  background  illumination.  The 
local  averaging  technique  averages  every  4  x  4  block  of  local  pixel’s  descriptor,  and  gets   1  averaged 
descriptor to represent the entire block. This way, the descriptors become less noisy and more compressed. 
As a machine learning project, we also compared different training algorithms, which are SVM and Naïve 
Bayes algorithms. 
We  assessed  and  compared  the  performance  of  different  image  processing  and machine  learning 
techniques  with  4  criteria,  which  are  classification  accuracy,  detection  rate,  false  alarm  rate,  and 
computation time. 
 
Performance Analysis  

4 
 

Figure 3 shows the comparison of accuracy, detection rate, false alarm rate and computa tion time 
over  the  basic  DSIFT  and  the  two  image  processing  techniques  we  discussed  above:  DSIFT  with  local 
averaging and DSIFT with local contrast normalization. Here, all the three sets of data were got using the 
SVM  algorithm  for  the  machine  learning  part.  From  the  figure,  we  can  find  that  the  local  averaging 
technique gives  the best performance  in  terms of accuracy, detection rate, and computation  time, but as a 
tradeoff,  it  has  the  highest  false  alarm  rate. The  computation  time  of  basic DSIFT  and  the  local  contrast 
normalization  algorithms  increase  dramatically  after  size  of  training  sample  reaches  180,  due  to  large 
requirement of computer memory.  

 
Figure 3. Accuracy, Detection Rate, False Alarm Rate, Computation Time Comparison over Three Image 
Processing Techniques 

Figure 4 shows the comparison of accuracy, detection rate, false alarm rate and computation time 
over SVM and Naïve Bayes algorithms. For the image processing part, we used the DSIFT algorithm 
with local averaging technique for both sets of experiments. Comparing the performance of human 
detection with SVM and Naïve Bayes algorithms, we discovered that SVM out-performs Naïve in terms 
of accuracy, detection rate and false alarm rate. But the computation time for SVM increases 
quadratically as training sample size increases, while the time for Naïve Bayes only increase linearly.  
 

 
Figure 4.  Accuracy, Detection Rate, False Alarm Rate, Computation Time Comparison over SVM and 
Naïve Bayes Algorithms 

 

Figure 5 shows the accuracy comparison over the MIT pedestrian dataset and INRIA dataset. We 
can  observe  that  the  accuracy  of  classification with MIT  dataset  remains  very  high  even with  very  small 
training  size and  it can  reach 99.12%. For  the more challenging dataset, we can get  higher accuracy with 
increasing training size, which finally reaches 92.87%.  
 
From  the  data  measured,  we  can  find  that  using  the  DSIFT  algorithm  with  local  averaging 
technique  and  SVM  algorithm,  the  accuracy  of  human  classification  accuracy  can  reach  99.12%;  the 
detection  rate  can  reach  99.75%;  the  false  alarm  rate  can maintain  below  2.75%  for  the MIT  Pedestrian 
dataset.  On  the  other  hand,  for  the  INRIA  dataset,  the  accuracy  of  classification  can  reach  92.87%;  the 
detection rate can reach 98.75%; the false alarm rate can maintain below 15.75%.   
 

Figure 5    Accuracy Comparison over INRIA and MIT Pedestrian Dataset 
 
 

 

5 

6 

Conclusion 
In  this  project,  we  implemented  the  people  detection  program  with  the  Dense  SIFT  algorithm. 
Different image processing and machine learning  techniques were explored and assessed, which are local 
contrast normalization vs.  local averaging, and SVM vs. Naive Bayes. We conclude  that  the DSIFT with 
local  averaging  and  SVM  algorithm  yields  the  best  classification  accuracy,  which  is  99.12%  for  MIT 
dataset  and  92.87%  for  INRIA  dataset. However,  if  computation  time  is  of  concern,  the    local  averaging 
with Naïve Bayes algorithm can also give reasonably good accuracy with much less computation time.  
 
Acknowledgment 
The  authors  wish  to  thank  Professor  Andrew  Ng, Will  Zou  and  the  teaching  assistants  of  cs229 
for their feedback and guidance. 
 
Reference 
[1] http://www.vlfeat.org/overview/dsift.html 
[2] D. G. Lowe. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints. IJCV, 60(2):91–110, 
2004. 
[3] http://cbcl.mit.edu/software-datasets/PedestrianData.html 
[4] http://pascal.inrialpes.fr/data/human/ 
[5] http://www.vlfeat.org/ 

