Predicting Probability of Loan Default  
Stanford University, CS229 Project report 
Jitendra Nath Pandey, Maheshwaran Srinivasan 
12/15/2011 
Abstract: Extending credit to individuals is necessary for markets and societies to function smoothly. 
Estimating the probability that an individual would default on his/her loan, is useful for banks to decide 
whether to sanction a loan to the individual and is also useful for borrowers to make better financial 
decisions. In this project, we used supervised learning to estimate the probability of loan default for 
individuals. Training and test data were drawn from a competition on Kaggle [1]. The metric used to 
judge the efficiency of a solution was the AUC (area under the ROC Curve) calculated on probabilities of 
default for the test data. We tried Logistic regression, Probit Regression, Support Vector Machines 
(SVM) using an RBF (Radial Basis Function) Kernel, Classification trees and finally Random Forests.  
We obtained the best result (AUC score of 0.867125) with Random Forests Regression, using over-
sampling to mitigate class 1/0 imbalance and using carefully chosen coded values for missing values. 
 
1. Introduction: Our goal was to estimate the probability that a person applying for a loan will 
experience 90 days past due on loan payments or delinquency or an even more serious financial crisis. 
The training data, drawn from the competition ‘Give me some Credit’ on Kaggle [1], contained records 
on 150,000 people. Each training record had information on 10 input features and a binary (0/1) 
dependent variable. The test data had records for 101,503 people containing information on the above 10 
features and we had to predict probability of loan default for these people based on the input features. The 
effectiveness of the prediction was judged by calculating the AUC (area under the ROC curve) from the 
probabilities of default for the test records. The AUC calculated on all the 101,503 test records (which 
shall be referred to as AUC_FULL) was made available to us only at the end of the competition, just two 
days before the project deadline. An AUC calculated on 30% of the test records (which shall be referred 
to as AUC_PART) was available to us throughout the competition. Our decision making on algorithm 
selection was hence guided somewhat by AUC_PART in addition to AUC scores computed on held out 
training data. Luckily, our AUC_PART scores correlated very well with our AUC_FULL scores. 
     𝐴𝑈𝐶 = (𝑆1−𝑛1∗𝑛1+12 )
The AUC metric for a 2-class problem is calculated as: Sort the estimated probabilities in ascending order 
      where,  𝑆1  is the sum of the ranks of class-1 records and  
𝑛0 ∗𝑛1
     𝑛0  (𝑛1 ) is the number of items which are actually class-0(1) 
 
2. Data: The training and test data suffered from the following problems: 
•  Missing values for 2 features. As much as 21% of the records have missing features. 
•  Coded values for 3 other features. Only 0.2% of the records have coded values. 
•  Most of the input features had outliers. For instance, Ruul, a feature with high predictive power, 
normally in the range [0,1], sometimes had anomalously high values (50,000+)  
•  Class imbalance in training data i.e. number of records with class-1 labels was only 6% of the 
total records.  
 
3.1 Logistic and Probit Regression:  In Logistic regression, 𝑃(𝑌 = 1|𝑋 ;β) =
1
3. Algorithms and Results 
1+𝑒−β𝑇𝑋 
In Probit regression, 𝑃(𝑌 = 1|𝑋;β) =  Φ(β𝑇𝑋)   where Φ is CDF of N(0,1) (Standard normal) 
3.1.1 Multiple Models: Since the parameter  β  could be quickly computed even when the training data 
had more than 100,000 records, to solve the problem of missing data in the test records, we developed 8 
different models, each model using a different subset of input features. For instance one model used all 10 
features and was employed when all features were present, another model used only input features 1..9 
and was employed when feature10 was missing and so on.  Thus depending on the features that were 

“clean” in the test data record, we would use the appropriate model to compute the probability of a 
positive (class 1).  
3.1.2 Feature Saturation and Under-sampling: We were able to get a dramatic leap in performance by 
saturating an important feature with high predictive power (Ruul) to a maximum value (Ruul_max) that 
was determined by 10-fold Cross validation in the test data and throwing away training records which had 
Ruul > Ruul_max. We obtained a further small increase in the AUC_PART score by under-sampling 
class0 records so that ratio of class0 records to class1 records was 3:1 (found by 10-fold cross validation). 
Figure 1 

Table 1 
Logistic 
(AUC_PART) 

Probit 
(AUC_PART) 

0.81116 

0.81237 

0.84768 

0.84918 

Approach 

Multiple 
models 

Multiple 
models with 
Feature 
saturation 

0.84919 

0.8492 

Multiple 
models, Feature  
saturation, Data 
balancing 

3.1.3 Diagnostics: As a diagnostic procedure, we plotted AUC curves (Training AUC and Test AUC with 
5-fold Cross validation, versus size of training data) (See Fig1) for both logistic and Probit regression 
with multiple models, Ruul saturation and Data Balancing. From the AUC curves, we saw that training 
and test AUC were nearly the same for reasonable number of training samples. Hence we concluded that 
high variance was not a problem.  Since we were targeting an AUC of above 0.86, we concluded that 
relatively high bias might be a problem which led us to explore Kernelized approaches.  
 
3.2. Support Vector Machines 
3.2.1: Choice of SVM, kernel and class probability estimation: We used the C-SVM with L1 
regularization and RBF(radial basis function) Kernel. We focused on RBF kernel since, we seemed to be 
suffering from high bias and this Kernel maps input samples into an infinite dimensional space. Also RBF 
Kernel has relatively fewer model parameters to optimize, is numerically stable compared to high order 
polynomial kernels and some other kernels like Linear and Sigmoid kernel are special cases of the RBF 
Kernel under certain conditions [3]. 
We used the libsvm library [2] to implement the SVM with RBF Kernel for our problem. In order to 
generate posterior probabilities, libsvm uses an improved form of Platt’s method [4] which consists of 
                            𝑃(𝑦 = 1|𝑋) =  σ (A  𝑓(𝑋) + 𝐵)   where, 
approximating the probability by a sigmoid function of the form: 
                           𝑓(𝑋) =   𝑤 𝑇 φ(X) +  b   and σ is the sigmoid function 

3.2.2: Methodology: We opted to train only three models due to the computational complexity of model 
training, again each model using a different subset of input features. For each test-record depending on 
the “clean” features available, we used the appropriate model. In the test data, we replaced coded values 
with their median, which was 0. We hoped that this would not have a significant negative impact since the 
number of such records was only 0.2% of the total. We used 5-fold cross validation with AUC as the 
metric to estimate optimal C and γ for each of the 3 models. We also saturated the Ruul parameter to a 
maximum value Ruul_max for all test records and threw out training records with  Ruul > Ruul_max. 
3.2.3: Under-sampling to handle imbalance of class-1 and class-0 records: Since cross validation is 
computationally expensive we used a smaller training data set of 20,000 “clean” records with a 3:1 ratio 
of class0 records to class1 records for C and γ estimation. Once optimal parameters were obtained, each 
model was retrained on a larger data set containing 32,000 clean records with again a 3:1 ratio of class0 to 
class1 records. We computed posterior probabilities with these 3 optimized models and obtained an 
AUC_PART score of 0.85013. 
3.2.4: Class weights to handle imbalance of class-1 and class-0 records: Instead of using under-
sampling, we also tried applying a more severe misclassification penalty for class-1 records.  More 
specifically, libsvm gives the option of applying penalties C*w0 for errors in classifying class-0 records 
and C*w1 for errors in classifying class-1 records as opposed to a common penalty of C. We generated a 
training set of 20,000 records by randomly sampling from the “clean” training data. Then we set w0 to 1 
and tried to find optimal values for C, γ and w1 by brute-force search over a well designed search space 
and using 5-fold cross-validation with AUC as metric. We found optimal parameters for each of the three 
models. Once optimal parameters had been obtained for the three different models, we re-trained the three 
models with these optimal parameters for C, γ and w1 over the entire “clean” training data containing 
around 118,000 records to predict class probabilities. We computed posterior probabilities and obtained 
an AUC_PART score of 0.84628. 
 
3.3. Classification Trees (CART) 
3.3.1: Description: In a classification tree, the input feature space is partitioned into a set of rectangles 
(regions) using recursive binary splits and then in each rectangle, a simple model like a constant is 
fitted[6]. Given a region R containing training records, to split the region into R1 and R2, all possible 
*, s*
) is selected that optimizes 
binary splits (X i  < s, X i  >= s) are examined and the (feature, value) pair (X i
a particular criterion - minimize Gini index or Cross Entropy/Deviance or maximize “twoing” metric [5]. 
This process is repeated recursively for each child and we stop splitting if a node is pure (i.e. contains 
observations of only one class), or it has fewer than MinParent records or if any split imposed on this 
node would result in a child with less than MinLeaf records.  For predicting class probabilities for a test 
record, the test record is “run” down the classification tree until it reaches a leaf node and then the class-1 
probability is estimated as the fraction of class-1 elements in that leaf node. 
3.3.2: Avoiding over-fitting: Deep trees are susceptible to over-fitting and there are two ways of 
controlling their depth and reducing generalization error. One method is to find an optimal value for the 
MinLeaf parameter (30 different values, varied logarithmically from 10 to 1000) using 10-fold cross-
validation. The other method called pruning, is to grow a full-sized deep tree and then to reduce the tree 
depth by recursively merging leaf nodes. The optimal tree-depth to prune is decided using 10-fold cross-
validation. 
3.3.3: Handling missing values using surrogate variables: While building a classification tree, at each 
non-leaf node R, having chosen an optimal (primary) feature F and split point, we also choose secondary, 
tertiary… features and split points ranked according to the ability of the feature to mimic the split of the 
training data at node R according to the primary feature F. When a test record is “run” down the tree and 
hits node R, if it has primary feature F missing, then the best ranking non-missing feature is used for 
finding the child node to go to. 
3.3.4: Results from using classification trees: We implemented classification trees using MATLAB 
Statistics toolbox. We experimented with three different node splitting criteria – Gini, Deviance and 
Twoing and both methods of controlling over-fitting – finding optimal value for MinLeaf and Pruning. 

We were able to obtain best results with split criterion set to Twoing, using optimal value for MinLeaf 
and turning on the option to use Surrogate variables at each node. We obtained AUC_PART=0.85310. 
 
3.4: Random Forests 
3.4.1: Description: Random forest is an ensemble supervised learning method, which builds a large 
collection (500-2500) of de-correlated trees and then averages them [6]. Each tree in the ensemble is 
 from the training set and growing a classification or 
constructed by taking a boot-strap sample of size N b
regression tree with that sample. While growing the tree, at each node, m out of the P input features are 
randomly selected to determine best feature for splitting at that node. Reducing m, reduces the correlation 
between the different trees but it also reduces the “strength” of each individual tree [7]. While predicting, 
a test record is “run” down each tree and the results over all trees in the ensemble are averaged for 
regression and a majority vote taken for classification. Usually the mean square error is used as the 
splitting criterion while building regression trees and the Gini index is used as the splitting criterion while 
building classification trees. 
3.4.2: Application to our problem and results: We decided to use the R-package randomForest [8] 
since MATLAB statistics toolbox did not seem to support Random Forests. The important parameters to 
optimize for both types of Random Forests were m and MinNodeSize (for each of the trees grown).  In 
=20000, grew 1000 trees and 
order to optimize these parameters we drew bootstrap samples of size N
b
estimated effectiveness of the parameters on held-out cross validation data with AUC as the metric.  We 
found optimal values for m and MinNodeSize by using brute-force search over a limited search space. We 
used the Random Forest with optimized parameters to predict class probabilities for the test data.  
We found that attempts at “cleaning” data like saturating the Ruul parameter or replacing coded 
values with medians backfired. Since the package randomForest in R, did not handle missing values 
gracefully, we started by training three different models similar to SVM’s. We did this for both regular 
data and balanced data (created using under-sampling) and used both Regression and Classification based 
random forests but were unable to significantly improve on a simple reference solution that used Random 
Forest regression on only the clean input features. We achieved a key breakthrough by replacing missing 
values with coded values (-1 was used) and training, optimizing a single model using all 10 input features. 
We also gained some improvement by using over-sampling of class-1 training records to mitigate class-
imbalance as opposed to under-sampling of class-0 records. Using Random Forest regression, replacing 
missing values with -1’s and over-sampling class1 records we were able to get an AUC_PART of 
0.86203 which was our highest.                                                                              
 
4: Discussion: Logistic Regression, Probit Regression and SVM’s are traditionally not very effective 
when there is a significant amount of missing data, as in the case of our problem [6]. The non-competitive 
performance of Logistic and Probit regression can also be attributed to the fact that, they produce linear 
decision boundaries using only 10 input features even though there is an abundance of training data 
(150,000 records). As for SVM’s, they are not specifically encouraged while training to optimally predict 
class probabilities. Rather the goal is to maximize separation from the separating hyper-plane in the 
higher dimensional space. Significant missing data along with this fact might explain the relatively lower 
performance of SVM’s on this dataset. 
Classification trees are effective at handling missing data and outliers. They are also invariant to 
monotone transformations of an input feature. This might explain why Ruul parameter saturation, which 
produces significant benefits for Logistic, Probit Regression and SVM’s, is not necessary for 
Classification trees. Classification trees are notorious for having high variance [6] and we were pleasantly 
surprised that a well-tuned Classification tree could out-perform tuned C-SVM’s.  
Random Forests were invented as a method to reduce the Variance problem of Classification trees 
and it is no-surprise that they out-perform Classification Trees. We were able to obtain significant 
benefits by tuning m (the number of input features selected at random at each node as split candidates) 
and the minimum node size. However we are unable to satisfactorily explain the following results: 

•  Random Forest regression was better at predicting class probability estimates than Random Forest 
Classification. Our best guess is that this might have to do with the split criterion - Mean square 
error, used for regression as opposed to the Gini Index that is used for Classification. 
•  The hack of replacing missing values with -1 performed significantly better than a multiple model 
approach, where depending on the clean features available in the test-record, an appropriate tuned 
Random Forest was used. 
We tried three approaches to handle the imbalance between class0 and class1 records - under-sampling of 
class-0 records, over-sampling of class-1 records and using different weights for class0 and class1 records 
when the algorithm permitted it. We obtained best performance with over-sampling of class1 records. 
 

0.84920 

NA 

0.864388 

0.864954 

0.855333 

0.856121 

0.857019 

0.867125 

0.85976 

0.85842 

0.86203 

0.85013 

0.85310 

AUC_FULL 
0.855270 

AUC_PART 
0.84919 

Table2: Final summary 
Approach 
Logistic regression, multiple models, Data cleaning and under-
sampling 
Probit regression, multiple models, Data cleaning and under-
sampling 
SVM with RBF Kernel, multiple models, Data cleaning and under-
sampling 
Classification trees using Optimal MinLeaf, Twoing for splitting and 
surrogate variables 
Reference Solution using Random Forest Regression with only 
“clean” features 
Random Forest classification using coded values for missing values 
and under-sampling 
Random Forest regression using coded values for missing values and 
over-sampling 
The Winning Team (Not us, we were 135th
 out of 970 teams) 
 
5: Conclusion: Based on our experience in this project, given a binary classification problem with 
missing data, we would recommend first trying Random Forests, tuning m and minimum node size and 
addressing class imbalance by over-sampling. After the results were announced we learned that the best 
scores were obtained by blending/averaging the results from different schemes like Random Forest 
Regression and Classification, Gradient Boosted Regression and Classification Trees and Neural 
networks. Also the winning team combined the 10 given features to produce as many as 35 features to use 
in their algorithms. 
 
References: 
1: http://www.kaggle.com/c/GiveMeSomeCredit 
2: Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin, LIBSVM : a library for support vector machines. ACM 
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 2:27:1--27:27, 2011.  
3: H.-T. Lin and C.-J. Lin: A study on sigmoid kernels for SVM and the training of non-PSD kernels by 
SMO-type methods. Technical report, Department of Computer Science, National Taiwan University, 
2003.  
4: John C.Platt: Probabilistic Outputs for Support Vector Machines and Comparisons to Regularized 
Likelihood Methods (1999). Advances in Large Margin Classifiers. 
5: http://www.mathworks.com/help/toolbox/stats 
6: Hastie, Tibshirani and Friedman: The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining, Inference and 
Prediction, 2nd
 Ed. 2009 
7: 
http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~breiman/RandomForests 
8: A. Liaw and M. Wiener (2002). Classification and Regression by randomForest. R News 2(3), 18--22. 

0.869558 

