Improving Accuracy of Inertial Measurement Units
using Support Vector Regression

Saran Ahuja, Wisit Jirattigalachote, and Art Tosborvorn

Abstract— Inertial measurement unit (IMU) is a sensor
that measures acceleration and angular velocity rate.
It has become increasingly popular due to its small
size and low cost comparing to typical marker-based
motion capture system. Nonetheless, IMUs face consid-
erable challenges,
in particular noticeable inaccuracy
from accumulated integration errors. In this project, we
attempted to improve accuracy of IMUs in measuring
clinical knee angles using supervised machine learning,
speciﬁcally support vector regression. By employing high-
accuracy data from marker-based motion capture system
as training samples, we were able to see improvement in
the performance of the IMUs estimation of clinical knee
angles in walking motion. This result is promising and
encourages further works that might extend the model
to include a more general set of movements.

I . IN TRODUC T ION

Since its introduction in 1990, motion capture is
used not only in the entertainment business such as
ﬁlms and games, but it is also used extensively in
sports, medicine, and military. Traditionally, motion
capture is done using images captured from cameras
to triangulate positions of each reﬂective marker in the
3-dimensional space. While this marker-based system
performs extremely well in terms of positional accuracy
and continue to hold its status as the industrial standard,
there is a number of undesirable features, including
high cost, setup complexity, and space limitation.
Recently, an alternative method has gained popu-
larity. Inertial motion capture uses sensors—inertial
measurement units, IMUs—attached to different parts
of the body, much like reﬂective markers used in the
optical system, to measure acceleration and angular
velocity. This raw data may then be used to calculate
parameters of interest, such as joint angles and other
positional data. Due to its small form factor, minimal
setup requirements, and low cost, inertial motion cap-
ture has come to be an appealing alternative to the
marker-based system. In addition, since inertial motion
capture does not require camera setup, it is a viable
solution for capturing outdoor motions like skiing or

mountain biking that otherwise may never be achieved
through traditional marker-based motion capture.
As good as it may sound, inertial motion capture has
one big disadvantage. Unlike the marker-based system,
inertial motion capture lacks absolute positional data
and relies heavily on integrating acceleration as well
as angular velocity vectors in order to compute its
absolute position. Taking into account sensor errors and
motion approximation, the errors from this integration
procedure quickly add up, and the result becomes more
inaccurate as time passes.
In this project, we attempted to improve the accuracy
of inertial motion capture using supervised machine
learning. Using both systems to simultaneously capture
a subject’s motion, we trained the inertial motion
capture model to more accurately estimate the valuable
clinical knee angles of the subject during a walking
motion.

I I . SY ST EM & DATA PROCE S S ING
A. Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU)
In this project, we used a system of low cost wireless
inertial measurement units. The system is shown in Fig.
1. The system consisted of two IMUs with the capabil-
ity of expanding up to 128 units. Each IMU has a 3-
axis accelerometer with ±8g range, a 3-axis gyroscope
with 1600 deg/s range, and a 3-axis magnetometer with
±4 Gauss range, all in 16-bit resolution. The data was
sampled at 100 Hz and transferred to mobile phone for
processing and data storage via Bluetooth connection.

B. Marker-based Motion Capture System
The marker-based motion capture system is widely
accepted as the industry’s ‘gold standard.’ In our ex-
periment, the reference system was the Vicon motion
capture system with 8 cameras setup, running at 60
frames per second with sub-mm accuracy.

C. Experimental Protocol
We collected two standard static trials in order to
estimate the rotation matrices from each IMU’s body

where

= Aω (t)˜q,

the rotation matrix can be computed as follow:
0 − ˜λT ˜λ)I + 2˜λ˜λT − 2q0 [˜λ×],
R(˜q) = (q2
(1)
where I is the identity matrix and [˜λ×] is standard
vector cross product. Then the following differential
motion describes the dynamic of body angular motion:
d˜q(t)
dt

 0
−ωz
ωy
ωx
−ωx ωy
0
ωz
−ωy
ωz
0
ωx
−ωx −ωy
ωz
0
and ω(t) = [ωx , ωy , ωz ], the angular velocity of B . Let
∆t denote the system’s sampling interval and assume
that ˜q(t) is constant for t ∈ [k∆t, (k + 1)∆t]. Then we
can solve equation (2) explicitly and get a discrete-time
quaternion

(2)

Aω (t) =

1
2

˜qk+1 = eAk∆t ˜qk ,

where ˜qk is the quaternion at time k∆t and Ak =
Aω (k∆t). ˜q0 is computed so that the rotation matrix
is consistent with our initial static position. Once the
discrete system above is solved, the rotation matrix is
updated using equation (1).
After we found the rotation matrix representing the
rotation from IMUs’ body frame to the world frame, we
used a joint coordinate system (JCS) as recommended
by ISB and deﬁned by Grood and Suntay [4], [5] to
calculate the clinical knee angles.

Fig. 2. Experimental Setup: A subject is wearing both IMUs and
reﬂective markers.

Fig. 1. Inertial measurement unit (IMU) system with Bluetooth
capability.

frame to the reference frame. After the initial setup, we
collected data of 42 normal walking trials on a treadmill
at 1.00 m/s. For each trial, we collected the data using
both IMUs and Vicon systems simultaneously. At the
beginning of each trial, the subject jumped and stood
still for a few seconds in order for us to be able to
synchronize the timing of both systems. Of the 42 trials,
three trials were dropped due to the corrupted data from
the IMUs, leaving us with 39 trials.

D. Clinical Knee Angle Estimation
Some of the key of parameters of a walking motion
are the clinical knee angles. These parameters are very
helpful for a physician to analyze knee-related injuries
in patients. The clinical knee angle measurements
consist of three parameters: ﬂexion/extension, adduc-
tion/abduction, and internal/external rotation angles.
Before processing any data, we synchronized the
data from both IMU and Vicon together using the
jumping event at the beginning of the trial. We then
only used the data after jumping for training and
reporting results.
From the IMUs data, we performed a quaternion-
based strap-down integration method [1], [2], [3] in
order to estimate the rotation matrices. Our raw data
consisted of gyroscopic rates, denoted by ω(t), and
acceleration with respect to the body frame B . We
need to ﬁnd a rotational matrix that transformed an
IMU body frame into the world reference frame W . We
will denote this rotation matrix by R(t). A convenient
way to keep track of R(t) is to use the quaternion
representation ˜q = [q0 , ˜λ˜λT ], where q0 is a scalar and
˜λ is a 3 × 1 vector. Given the quaternion representation,

I I I . M ETHODO LOGY
As mentioned earlier, inertial motion capture suffers
from buildup of errors. In this section, we describe
the use of supervised machine learning procedure, in
particular support vector regression,
to improve the
estimation from measurement of IMUs.
After processing the data as described in the previous
section, the clinical knee angles estimation θ IMU (t) are
computed. Using relatively accurate position data from
marker-based system, we were able to compute these
angles with great accuracy. This set of data served as
the target value. We then train the model using ν -SVR
with the pairs (θ IMU (t), θMarker (t)).

A. Model
Accepted as the ‘gold standard’ for position captur-
ing, θMarker (t) is treated as ‘actual’ knee joint angle and
we have the following model:
t = θMarker
θ IMU
+ εt ,
t
where εt is the error from the measurement (sensor
noise) and integration. Since our main application is
to measure knee joint angle related to a speciﬁc body
movement (walking, running, etc.), one might expect
the error to be correlated with the angle θMarker (t). Let
εt = φ(θMarker
t

) + ˜εt ,

) + ˜εt .

so that
t = θMarker
) + ˜εt = ˜φ(θMarker
θ IMU
+ φ(θMarker
t
t
t
Inverting this relationship, we have
= ψ(θ IMU
θMarker
t
t
which gives a setting where the support vector regres-
sion can be applied. This derivation is not meant to
be rigorous, but rather to motivate our use of support
vector regression.

) + ˜εt ,

B. Learning Method
From each trials, we collected and processed our
data to get a sample path of angles measurement
from both IMUs and marker-based motion capture as
a function of time. The processed data consisted of
triplets (t, θ IMU
, θMarker
), where t = 1, 2, . . . , T , and
t,i
t,i
i = 1, 2, . . . , N . T is the number of time steps and
N is the number of trials (39 in our experiment). Our
training size is N · T where (t, θ IMU
t,i ) gives us input
samples to be trained with target θMarker
.
t,i
We applied ν -SVR with various kernels to the train-
ing set and compared the performance among different

TABLE I
ROOT M EAN SQUAR E ERROR

Clinical Knee Angle
Flexion/Extension
Abduction/Adduction
Internal/External Rotation

Linear
6.1215
0.6324
2.3546

Polynomial
6.1169
0.6328
2.3555

RBF
6.1278
0.6329
2.3545

kernels. To evaluate the generalization capability of the
model, we used leave-ﬁve-out cross validation method
with root mean square error as a criteria. More con-
cretely, we performed 8 trainings and trained the model
using 34 walks and cross validated with 5 walks (except
for the last training in which we used 35 walks to train
and 4 walks to cross validate). The learning procedure
can be summarized as follows:
• Normalize the training sample to have range [0,1].
Let θm , θM be the minimum and maximum of our
(cid:32)
(cid:33)
sample angles, then
t,i − θm
− θm
θ IMU
θMarker
t
t,i
θM − θm
θM − θm
T
• Apply ν−SVR with regularization parameter C =
1 to the normalized training set {(xt,i , yt,i )}, i =
1, 2, . . . , N , t = 1, 2, . . . , T }. We use libsvm
toolbox [6] which provides all necessary Matlab
functions.
• Compute leave-ﬁve-out cross validation error us-
ing root mean square error as a metric.

xt,i =

,

,

yt,i =

.

IV. R E SU LT S

For kernel selection in our support vector regression
method, we tried linear, polynomial, and radio-basis
function (RBF) kernels. The results showed no signiﬁ-
cant advantage of one kernel over others across all three
angle measurements, as can be seen in Table I. For knee
ﬂexion/extension angle, we found the RMS error to be
approximately 6.12 degrees. Knee adduction/abduction
angle had an RMS error around 0.63 degrees, and for
the knee internal/external rotation angle, the RMS error
was 2.35 degrees.
By using our model from SVR, we found a signif-
icant improvement in all three knee angles estimation
from IMUs. As seen in a sample walking trial in Fig.
3, the IMUmodel (i.e. IMU data processed with SVR)
was closer to the Vicon reference system, on average
of more than 50%. In addition, our estimated model
reduced the RMS errors over time across all trials at
least in half, as seen in Fig. 4.

Fig. 3. Estimations of three clinical knee angles using data from
IMUs improve by more than 50% using SVR, as we can see
IMUmodel is close to the reference system (Vicon).

Fig. 4. Root-mean-squared errors due to time effect from IMUs are
reduced by more than 40% on average.

V. D I SCU S S ION

Each kernel (linear, polynomial, and RBF) showed
comparable performance across all three types of knee
angles, as seen in Table I. This is possibly due to the
structure of the error that was not speciﬁc to any kind
of kernel. These relatively low cross validation errors
allowed the model to ﬁt the actual angle nicely without
over ﬁtting the data. Also note that the magnitudes of
these errors are relatively good comparing to what have
been found in a few other similar studies [7], [8], [9],
[10]. Our model estimation has an advantage of very
little computation time requirement (around 15 seconds
for a sample of 34 trials, polynomial kernel). However,
our model only considered a speciﬁc normal walking
condition on a treadmill. Thus further experiments
involving various motions and speed will be required
to improve the generalization of the model.
Support vector regression was able to reduce the
error in the knee angle estimation signiﬁcantly, as seen
in Fig. 3. One observation from the data is that the
error increased in time due to accumulation of error
from each time step discretization. By adding time
since last static position parameter into our model, we
were able to reduce accumulating errors signiﬁcantly.
Nevertheless, SVR is still unable to completely remove

non-systematic errors such as hardware sensor noises.
With regards to the nature of the subject’s movement,
we notice that when the subject’s foot hit the ground,
the IMU registered signiﬁcant noise in acceleration.
This would suggest that we might observe periodic
spikes in errors from the IMU. However, Fig. 4 showed
that the root-mean-squared error from the IMUs does
not appear to be periodic as expected. This was due in
part by the not completely synchronized step cycles
from our pre-processed data. Therefore these spikes
were averaged out over 39 trials. The residuals, on the
other hand, exhibits higher degree of periodicity. This
might be due to SVR, which takes into account of the
time parameter, was able to notice the cyclical trend.

V I . CONC LU S ION
In this paper, we explored support vector regression
method to help improve knee angle estimation from
multiple inertial measurement units. We used a gold
standard marker-based motion capture system as our
learning examples. We then utilized cross validation
method to ﬁnd an appropriate kernel
to train the
model. The results demonstrated a vast improvement
of clinical knee angles estimation over the typical
IMUs measurement. This would allow us to capture the
essence of knee motion in a near-real-time calculation,
suitable for activities that require outdoor setting and

0123456020406080flexion/extensiontime (s)angle (degrees)  ViconIMUrawIMUmodel01234562468adduction/abductiontime (s)angle (degrees)  ViconIMUrawIMUmodel0123456(cid:239)10(cid:239)5051015internal/external rotationtime (s)angle (degrees)  ViconIMUrawIMUmodel0123456051015flexion/extensiontime (s)angle (degrees)  IMUrawIMUmodel012345600.511.52adduction/abductiontime (s)angle (degrees)  IMUrawIMUmodel01234560246internal/external rotationtime (s)angle (degrees)  IMUrawIMUmodelinstant feedback. Future work would require testing and
learning of multiple motions and joint angles in order
to improve the generalization of the model.

R E F ER ENC E S
[1] A. M. Sabatini, “Quaternion-based strap-down integration
method for applications of inertial sensing to gait analysis.”
Medical and Biological Engineering and Computing, vol. 43,
no. 1, pp. 94–101, 2005.
[2] J. Favre, B. M. Jolles, O. Siegrist, and K. Aminian,
“Quaternion-based fusion of gyroscopes and accelerometers to
improve 3D angle measurement,” Electronics Letters, vol. 42,
no. 11, pp. 612–614, 2006.
[3] J. C. K. Chou, “Quaternion kinematic and dynamic differential
equations,” Robotics and Automation, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 53–64, Feb. 1992.
[4] G. Wu, S. Siegler, P. Allard, C. Kirtley, A. Leardini, D. Rosen-
baum, M. Whittle, D. D. D?Lima, L. Cristofolini, H. Witte,
and et al., “Isb recommendation on deﬁnitions of joint coordi-
nate system of various joints for the reporting of human joint
motion–part i: ankle, hip, and spine. international society of
biomechanics.” Journal of Biomechanics, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.
543–548, 2002.
[5] E. S. Grood and W. J. Suntay, “A joint coordinate system for
the clinical description of three-dimensional motions: appli-
cation to the knee.” Journal of Biomechanical Engineering,
vol. 105, no. 2, pp. 136–44, 1983.
[6] C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin, “LIBSVM: A library for support
vector machines,” ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems
and Technology, vol. 2, pp. 27:1–27:27, 2011.
[7] J. Favre, R. Aissaoui, B. M. Jolles, O. Siegrist, J. A. de Guise,
and K. Aminian, “3D joint rotation measurement using MEMs
inertial sensors: Application to the knee joint,” in Ninth Inter-
national Symposium on the 3D Analysis of Human Movement.
International Society of Biomechanics (ISB) Technical Group
on the 3-D Analysis of Human Movement, June 2006.
[8] R. Takeda, S. Tadano, M. Todoh, M. Morikawa, M. Nakayasu,
and S. Yoshinari, “Gait analysis using gravitational accelera-
tion measured by wearable sensors.” Journal of Biomechanics,
vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 223–233, 2009.
[9] G. Cooper, I. Sheret, L. McMillian, K. Siliverdis, N. Sha,
D. Hodgins, L. Kenney, and D. Howard, “Inertial sensor-
based knee ﬂexion/extension angle estimation,” Journal of
Biomechanics, Sept. 2009.
[10] K. J. ODonovan, R. Kamnik, D. T. OKeeffe, and G. M. Lyons,
“An inertial and magnetic sensor based technique for joint
angle measurement,” Journal of Biomechanics, vol. 40, no. 12,
pp. 2604 – 2611, 2007. [Online]. Available: http://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021929007000103

