CS229A Project Report: Flame War Detection using
Naïve Bayes classication techniques

Louis Boval (boval@stanford.edu), Jimmy Tobin (jtobin1@stanford.edu)

Abstract

Classifying text using multinomial naïve bayes is now a com-
mon technique, notably for spam e-mail ltering. Our goal
with this pro ject was to attempt to adapt the same technique
to classifying a harder class of documents, ame wars, or very
heated discussions in public internet forums. To do so we im-
plemented a custom web scraper to build a corpus of data,
accompanied with our implementation of a naïve bayes classi-
er which we then augmented with several tweaks to attempt
to gain a better recall measure on large training sets, includ-
ing a technique described in [1] to leverage the large amount
of unlabeled data we could gather.

1

Introduction

Internet forums, albeit very engaging and useful, are sadly
a magnet for all kinds of abuse, provocations, hate speech
or spam. Various techniques are commonly used to detect
a subset of these superuous postings, including prevent-
ing automated scripts from posting using CAPTCHAS,
or applying spam detection to lter out unwarranted pro-
motional messages. One type of posts which still require
human intervention, however, are incendiary comments
and the resulting string of heated messages, which we
dub as "Flame". They detract greatly from the atmo-
sphere on public forums, and given the ease with which
they can be introduced without administrators noticing
means many willingly initiate them for the fun of it.
We wanted to see if spam ltering techniques could be
applied on discussion threads which display those issues,
and generate a model to detect future ames. Given that
the contents of messages which initiate those can be fairly
well worded in spite of their meaning, we chose to focus
our detection attempts on the thread of messages which
follow a ame initiator which would display more telltale
signs, rather the just the initiator itself.
In the follow-
ing sections, we will describe our process to generate a

useful corpus of data from the notoriously ame-ridden
youtube.com comment sections, our implementation of a
naïve bayes classier and the paths we followed to adapt
it to the problem at hand.

2

Corpus Creation

The rst step of the development process for the pro ject
once we ascertained a global outline of the techniques we
wanted to deploy was to nd a corpus of data on which to
train the eventual engine. Most such sets of documents
used for text classication engines did not have heated
speech as a class, we therefore had to build the corpus
ourselves, which given the abundance of examples on the
web was clearly feasible as long as websites structures
lent themselves to our research and properly reected
in code the structure of discussions. We chose to focus
our eorts on YouTube, which provides a stripped-down
version of its video pages to view comments in bulk (eg,
http://www.youtube.com/all_comments?v=myq8upzJDJc).
We wrote a python program to accomplish this
task,
using
the
freely
available Beautiful Soup
(http://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/)
module to parse HTML code into meaningful units,
and writing a simple command line interface to provide
access to the functionalities of the scraper. Additionally,
the program was structured to allow us to quickly switch
the focus website to guard against possible issues during
the two month period of the pro ject (we luckily didn't
have to, but a redesign of youtube.com very late in the
pro ject, although its changes to our pages of interest
were minor, proved the precaution to be justied). We
eventually were able to gather thread URL from the
youtube frontpage, and use those to generate a corpus
of unlabeled documents. Given this, we could launch an
interactive training session in the command line where
the user could classify a subset of his choice, and output

1

3 Naïve Bayes concepts and implementation

2

the corresponding training sets. After applying the
trained model to the rest of the data, the program could
also generate an HTML representation of each discussion
thread (for each video) with styling rules to dierentiate
between dierent classes of messages, to allow us to view
in the browser the results of the classication. With a
little eort the program could have been converted to a
CGI application to perform the required tasks entirely
controlled from a browser, excluding perhaps the initial
data gathering step which could run a little slow due to
understandable throttling on you tube's part.
After one hour of running the scraping portion of
the program, we obtained roughly 100.000 individual
messages from about 50 popular video threads, which
amounted to about 50.000 documents from our classify-
ing perspective, once messages were organized in threads
of responses. Out of this unlabeled corpus, we manually
labeled 5000 documents on a ame/not-ame basis, and
built a set of training les of increasing length (chosen
at random in the total set of labeled documents to en-
sure fairness) to test the classifying engine's sensitivity
to training set size. The training les took the shape of
a series of documents, headed by their classication and
followed by a sequence of word/word frequency pairs ob-
tained by splitting the messages texts in words, ltering
those to group numbers and exclude one-letter or two-
letter words as well a non-alphanumerical data. The les
were encoded in Unicode to avoid issues with the original
website encoding (UTF-8), which was tested by running
most of our early runs on a thread mixing Japanese and
western characters.
Once the frontend portion for manual classication and
corpus creation was built, we were able to focus on im-
plementing a naïve bayes classier, which we'll discuss in
the next section.

3 Naïve Bayes concepts and implementation

Multinomial Naïve Bayes classier description

As presented in [1], a multinomial naïve bayes classier
attempts to use the frequency of words in a document
relative to all the classes which we intend to represent, to
determine the class of an unlabeled document. An essen-
tial assumption, and reason for the name of the technique,
is to consider words to be independent of each other, thus
eectively allowing us to build our probabilistic model in
parallel across all words in the training documents, and
use baye's theorem to compute the probability of a doc-

ument belonging to a certain class through a fairly fast
multiplication.
Without delving into too much detail, which can be
reviewed on both bibliography references, let's establish
the basic classication model. A labeled document d is a
set of word frequencies fi for each word wi in the vocab-
ulary, and a class label c: d={..., wi , ..., c}. Combining
the document properties for all documents in the training
set, we emerge with a collection of word frequencies per
class label, which we can use to compute class probabil-
ity for each unlabeled document during the classication
phase. More specically, for each unlabeled document we
compute the maximum likelihood of classes to choose the
P (C = c) ∗ (cid:81)n
best one given the model, as follows:
i=1 P (wi |C = c)fi
P (d)

argmaxcP (C = c|d) =

(1)
To simplify computations in the actual implementa-
tion, we ignore the P(d) denominator which is a common
factor across the values we wish to maximize.
The value of P (wi |C = c) can be approximated using
Nic(cid:80)|V |
the training data, as follows:
P (wi |C = c) =
j=1 Nj c
where Nic is the count of occurrences of word wi in
training documents of class c , and |V| is the size of the
vocabulary. The occurrence count is the sum of all fi for
all documents in the training set.
P(C=c) is simply computed using the count of docu-
ments of class c in the training set relative to the total
count.

(2)

Implementation

The algorithm was entirely implemented in python, as a
script runnable both as standalone taking training les as
input, or directly callable from our scraper instance. This
aorded us great exibility when running tests over vari-
ations on our algorithm, and shielded us from potential
issues with the frontend program which had to contend
with network input and large amounts of data to save
between runs. Using an intermediary data format helped
us evolve the main data structures without risking inval-
idating existing data.
The training portion of the script was fed labeled doc-
uments as an input and produced a model ob ject contain-
ing the frequency vocabulary and various other measures

4 Improvements upon original algorithm

3

(class probability) to facilitate its use in a classication
run. Equation (1) was computed in log format to o-
set potential over/underow issues, and converted back
to exponential form if the precise values were needed for
comparison.
To evaluate the soundness of the algorithm, a subset
(20 to 30%) of the training portion was reserved during
development to be used as a test set and not integrated in
the trained model. We will describe in more detail the use
of this set in the fth section of this report. One impor-
tant note at this point is to remark that the ame class
is greatly outweighed by non-ames in the documents we
trained with, and consequently we had to evaluate our
results in the context of skewed classes. As such test ac-
curacy was not as meaningful as precision and recall, and
we will use both F1-scores and accuracy to evaluate the
performance of our models.

Without discussing the theoretical soundness of the
technique, we note that our implementation yielded un-
derwhelming results, as the precomputing step on the un-
labeled data set we produced, given its sheer size, was
particularly lengthy, and the improvement to the F1 score
was in the single digits (we could not compute the vari-
ance of this improvement given the running time of the
algorithm). For lack of time we decided not to attempt
to x the algorithm, as we obtained good results without
it, but a probable improvement would be to generate the
vocabulary at the scraping step, and update it to sepa-
rate labeled from unlabeled at every step of the manual
classication and later training process. The refactoring
work implied seemed too great in comparison with the
apparent yield of the technique, but should be explored
if the system is intended to be used in a real context.

4

Improvements upon original algorithm

In its original form, on our initial data sets, the algo-
rithm produced accuracy levels of roughly 60%, and an
F1 score of 50%, which required signicant improvement.
Although increasing the corpus size eventually brought
these values up, we worked on improving the results by
implementing as well improvements to the model, at var-
ious steps in the creation process.
Our main track of investigation in that view was the
semi-supervised techniques described in [1, 2], expecta-
tion maximization and frequency estimate from unlabeled
data. Given the relative complexities of the techniques,we
decided to focus on the latter one (seen in[1]), reserving
Expectation maximization to an eventual comparison if
the extension to frequency estimate yielded a signicant
improvement.
The main idea behind extending frequency estimate
was to use the frequency of instances of a word found in
the unlabeled data, and couple it with the class-specic
conditional probabilities obtained from the training set.
This led to changing the form of equation (2) into:
(cid:80)|V |
P (c,wi )l
P (wi )l
P (c,wj )l
P (wj )l
j=1
where subscript u indicates values obtained from the
unlabeled data set, and l values obtained from the labeled
data set. Equation (3) is then fed into equation (1) to
produce the classication prediction.

P (wi |C = c) =

(3)

P (wi )u

P (wj )u

Other alterations to the algorithm

To augment the algorithm, we decided to try other lighter
alterations based on intuitions about our target class of
documents.
Firstly, we imported an implementation of the Porter
word stemming algorithm from the python natural lan-
guage toolkit set of modules (http://www.nltk.org/), to
lter our vocabulary at the training stage (earlier would
have led us to a loss of data from the total scraped set
which we deemed unreasonable), and condense the size of
the vocabulary by removing synonyms, lightly misspelled
words and naturally merging words sharing the same root
under the assumption that meaning or use would be sim-
ilar in the context of ame wars. The next section will
describe the results we obtained from this addition, as it
proved to be an interesting improvement on small data
sets.
In addition to stemming we also added call to a Linux
utility, Hunspell (http://hunspell.sourceforge.net/), to
perform spell checking on the intake, in the hopes that
it would help us oset the general disregard for proper
spelling (syntax notwithstanding) displayed in youtube
comments.
It also yielded a small improvement to the
model, although when combined with stemming did not
prove eective (most likely because, if used before stem-
ming, it risked separating words which would otherwise
have been condensed by the stemming step, and when
used after would be mostly lost CPU time given that
stemming results are orthographically correct), and in-
creased the running time by a large factor (we used a
direct call to the shell utility, which is particularly slow

5 Experiments

4

when executed in fast succession), despite the addition of
a cache to minimize calls to the spellchecker.
Finally, we remarked that ame threads would be char-
acterized by a longer than usual length, and so decided
to attempt using it as a dierentiating factor beyond the
bag of words. Using it directly in the vocabulary was
deemed too tricky, as we would have to reconstruct a dis-
crete probability function on all natural numbers based
on the length measurements from the training set, which
in itself added a supplementary machine learning prob-
lem, having to perform a linear regression on a model to
t to the collection of lengths. For lack of time we de-
cided instead to predict the form of this model and test a
few values to see if it yielded a signicant improvement.
We asserted that the length probability could be mod-
eled by a continuous distribution function shaped after
the arc-tan function, which presents the particularity of
quickly rising from − p
2 to p
2 around 0. By shifting the
origin set of the function to cover document lengths and
changing its arrival set to [0, 1] we obtain a CDF that
quickly moves to high probabilities at a certain threshold
2 ∗ ( arctan(L−L0 )
L0 . The format is roughly f (L) = 1
+ 1).
p
2
f(Ld ) was used to alter the output probabilities used
(cid:48)
(C = F lame|d) = P (C =
in equation (1), as follows:P
F lame|d) + f (Ld ) ∗ P (C = N otF lame|d) and
(cid:48)
(C = N otF lame|d) = (1 − f (Ld )) ∗ P (C =
P
N otF lame|d)
We tested a set of values for L0 to measure its impact
on the classier. We gained better results on small data
sets, but this ceased to be true on large ones, and our
intuition here is that we need to conduct a regression on
both L0 and an additional a factor applied to (L - L0 ) to
stretch the transition area.

5

Experiments

As explained further up, we evaluated the eectiveness
of our algorithm by reserving a fraction of the training
sets for testing (we did not perform cross-validation). We
noted that both accuracy and F1 score improved signif-
icantly as the training set size increased, whereas im-
provement techniques became less eective, possibly due
to poor parametrization. The following graphs present
a few of the results obtained, focusing on the t of the
trained model to the training data (which only indicated
either good performance or massive overtting), and the
performance of the model on the test set with and with-
out the inclusion of stemming, to provide an indication of
whether overtting is occurring in reality.

The following graph presents the values for accuracy
and F1 when the trained model is reapplied to the train-
ing set. We notice that accuracy and F1 both peak at
0.9 and 0.8 respectively early on, while their variance de-
creases (the values were obtained by averaging over 15
runs of the algorithm, with a test set being extracted,thus
inducing a random factor and indicating the uniformity
of the training set). This indicates that the model is sta-
bilizing.

The following two graphs present F1 and accuracy val-
ues on the test set with and without stemming. Two
remarks of note here, on the one hand stemming loses
in eectiveness when the training set size increases, be-
ing overtaken by the vanilla implementation, and on the
other hand both score continue rising after the previous
t values for the training set stabilize, indicating that
overtting is progressively reduced.

These results indicate that the classier is fairly eec-

5 Experiments

5

tive on the training set we obtained by manually labeling
documents retrieved from youtube comment threads, and
lead us to believe the algorithm can be used in some ca-
pacity as a ame war detector with the proper source data
set. Also, as training examples become more numerous,
improvement techniques lose their eectiveness, due prob-
ably to a mist. Taking into account document length, in
particular, might be a worthwhile improvement to extract
supplementary features from existing data, that would
only require implementing a regression technique on the
training set, without having to alter the original content
gathering.

Conclusion

Through the use of a naïve bayes classier, and af-
ter training roughly 5000 documents obtained by scrap-
ing comment threads from youtube.com, we managed to
reach a fairly good classication performance for ame
war detection. While issues remain with overall perfor-
mance, scalability and safety against overtting such a
diverse set of text, we believe a naïve bayes based tech-
nique can be investigated further to automate the detec-
tion of these discussions which claim a signicant amount
of time for website administrators. Crowd-sourced ame
detection already exists by implementing simple voting
measures (karma on reddit), and these could be used to
augment the model presented here to improve accuracy
or possibly better adapt to context that display more
complexity than the admittedly limited community on
youtube.

References

[1] Su, Sayyad-Shirabad & Matwin, Large Scale Text
Classication using Semi-supervised Multinomial
Naive Bayes, 2011

[2] Nigam, McCallum, Thrun & Mitchell, Learning to
Classify Text from Labeled and Unlabeled Docu-
ments, 2000

