Electricity Demand Prediction in California 
 Bill Carson 
 
 
Bettina Chen   
 
Eric Glover 
Stanford University 
Stanford University   
 Stanford University     
 
Abstract 
esglover@stanford.edu  
bettinac@stanford.edu 
 wcarson1@stanford.edu 
Electricity demand must be met at all  times and  there are economic penalties to  the 
utility  for  incorrectly  predicting  the  demand.  Using  a  training  set  comprised  of  a 
year of data, we developed a learning algorithm to predict the electricity demand for 
the next day. The learning algorithm used input features of hourly temperature data 
and  day  of week  to  determine  a model.  It was  found  that  a  linear  regression model 
of a first order polynomial gave the  lowest error on the test set. The effectiveness of 
our model was  then  compared  to  the  day‐ahead market  (DAM)  prediction made  by 
California  Independent System Operator  (CAISO). While  the developed model had a 
higher  test error  than  the CAISO prediction,  the error  is  comparable. The difference 
can  likely  be  attributed  to  the  size  of  the  training  data  set  as  well  as  to  the  overall 
complexity  of  the  model.  However,  our  process  shows  that  a  simple  model  using 
only  hourly  temperature  data  and  day  of  week  as  features  can  effectively  predict 
electricity demand. 
 
 Electricity  is  the  ultimate  perishable  resource.  There  is  very  little  capacity  for 
storage  in  the  current  grid.  Supply  and  demand  must  be  equal  at  all  times.  Any 
1.  Introduction 
additional  power  produced  is  essentially  wasted,  and  mismatches  create 
undesirable  frequency variations  in  the output supply. Therefore,  it  is  important 
that  there  is  an  extremely  accurate  model  for  predicting  demand  of  electricity. 
This  demand  depends  on  numerous  factors  including  time  of  day,  temperature, 
season, and day of week. 
 Demand  forecasts  are used by  the DAM  to  schedule  generation  capacity. Certain 
types  of  generation,  such  as  nuclear  and  coal‐fired  power  plants,  can  produce 
energy  very  cheaply  but  can  take  a  long  time  to  ramp  production  up  or  down. 
Because  of  their  slow  response  rate,  these  plants  are  usually  operating  at  full 
capacity  and  are  referred  to  as  base  load  production.  Other  types  of  generation, 
such  as  natural  gas  plants,  can  ramp  up  or  down  very  quickly,  but  these  types 
also  tend  to  be  the  most  expensive  methods  of  generating  power.  A  more 
accurate model can allow for greater use of the cheapest types of generation and 
save significant costs in the production of electricity. 
1 

 

We  used  archived  electricity  demand  data  from  Open  Access  Same‐time 
Information  System  (OASIS),  the  database  from  the  California  Independent 
System Operator  (CAISO)  [1]. The control area of CAISO  includes  the majority of 
1.1. Data Sources 
California  outside  of  the  Sacramento  Municipal  Utility  District  and  the  Los 
Angeles  Department  of  Water  and  Power.  We  defined  our  project  scope  as  the 
San  Diego  Gas  &  Electric  (SDG&E)  service  territory  since  it  covers  a  relatively 
small area of 4,100 square miles, but services 3.5 million people [2]. It  is  ideal to 
select  a  location  with  a  large  population  in  order  to  provide  an  adequate 
representation  of  electricity  demand.  Additionally,  the  benefit  of  a  small 
geographic  location,  as  opposed  to  all  of  CAISO’s  service  territory,  is  that  the 
weather  data  will  be  more  uniform  in  a  small  control  region  than  across  the 
entire  state.  For  our  model,  we  gathered  temperature  data  from  Camp  Elliot, 
California, a military base in the SDG&E territory [3]. 
 
Given  the  large  data  set  of  electricity  demand  from  all  the  service  providers  in 
2.  Method 
OASIS,  we  isolated  the  SDG&E  electricity  production.  To  balance  out  regional 
 
electricity differences, a service  territory may need  to buy or sell a portion of  its 
2.1. Data Preprocessing 
electricity  production  to  neighboring  territories.  However,  we  simplified  our 
model  by  assuming  that  electricity  production  is  equal  to  electricity  demand  for 
the SDG&E region. Using the temperature data repository, we filtered the data to 
select out both the average daily and hourly temperature. 
 
We  included  five  features  in  our  first  model:  the  maximum,  minimum,  and 
average  daily  temperature,  hour  of  day,  and  day  of  week1.  Day  of  week  will 
distinguish  between  weekends  and  weekdays,  since  electricity  demand  on  any 
2.2. Least Squares 
weekday will  follow  a  similar  pattern, which may  be  different  than  the  demand 
on a weekend. Using the hourly temperature data, we constructed our model as: 
y = Ax  where y!R ( n *24 ) ,  A!R ( n*24)x5 ,  x!R 5 .   
We defined y as  the actual hourly electricity demand, A as  the matrix containing 
the input features for each hour, n as the number of days, and x as the parameter 
to  optimize. We  determined  x  using  the  least  squares  solution:  x = (AT A)!1 AT y . 
Additionally, we tried a variant of this model by including higher order terms, i.e. 
average temperature squared. This allowed us to determine if a nonlinear model 
can better predict electricity demand.  
                                                         
 
1 We defined day of week as follows: 
 

2 

One  potential  flaw  in  our  first  attempt  is  the  definition  of  x,  our  learned 
parameter.  It  gives  the  relative weighting  between  the  different  attributes,  such 
as  hour  of  day  or  average  daily  temperature. However,  this  introduces  bias  into 
2.3. Parameter Separation Least Squares  
the  model  since  it  assumes  a  direct  mapping  from  the  hour  of  the  day  to  the 
energy  demand  based  on  some  high  order  polynomial  relationship.  One  way  to 
address  this was by redefining our  initial problem  into 24 separate optimization 
problems: one for each hour of the day. In other words, given hour  j ={1,2,…,24}, 
we selected out the demand history and temperature features for hour j from the 
electricity  and  weather  data.  This  required  changing  the  temperature 
information  from  daily  to  hourly  temperature  statistics.  After  redefining  the 
problem,  the  x  values  that  are  obtained  as  the  least  squares  solution  have  a 
different  meaning.  Now,  the  x  values  represent  the  weighting  during  hour  j 
among the hourly temperature statistics and the day of week. This allowed us to 
determine  the weighting  among  the  different  features  for  each  unique  hour  and 
eliminated the bias from the earlier attempt.  
 
Using  least  squares, we developed  a  linear model  that had  fair performance. We 
3.  Results 
realized  that  the  typical  electricity  load  curve  follows  a  cyclical  pattern,  with  a 
 
valley  in  the  early  morning  and  peak  in  the  late  afternoon.  Therefore,  while  a 
3.1. Least Squares 
nonlinear  model  of  the  features  improved  performance  compared  to  the  linear 
combination,  it  was  still  not  satisfactory.  We  determined  that  the  cause  of  the 
unnecessary bias in the model was the arbitrary labeling of the hours of the day. 
 
                  
3.2. Parameter Separation Least Squares  

Figure 1: Test and Training Error vs Order of Input Polynomial 

 

3 

The  second  attempt  used  a  more  complicated  model,  which  improved 
performance.  We  gathered  a  dataset  of  one  full  year  of  electricity  demand  and 
temperature data. A training set was generated by randomly selecting 2/3 of this 
data  while  the  rest  was  reserved  for  a  test  set.  This  was  used  to  determine  the 
optimal order of the input features. Figure 1 shows that a first order model gives 
the  lowest  test  error  for  this  set  of  features  as  this  optimizes  the  tradeoff 
between bias and variance. 
 
To  quantify  the  effectiveness  of  our  model,  we  compared  the  test  error  of  our 
model’s  prediction  with  the  DAM  prediction  made  by  CAISO  for  the  day‐ahead 
market.  The  test  error  was  computed  by  taking  the  L2‐norm  of  the  difference 
3.3. Comparison to Utility Prediction 
between  the  actual  and  predicted  energy  demands  and  dividing  by  the  total 
number  of  days  in  the  test  set  to  define  the  average  error  per  day. By  averaging 
over  numerous  iterations, we  found  the  test  error  for  our model  to  converge  to 
98.6  MW  whereas  the  utility  prediction  had  a  test  error  of  42.6  MW.  Figure  2 
compares  the  predicted  electricity  demand  for  one  day  using  our  model  and 
CAISO’s to the actual demand. 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We  came  up  with  three  possible  sources  of  error  in  our  method:  energy  data, 
Figure 2: Comparison of Energy Predictions for Random Day In Test Set 
 
temperature data, and energy balance. Firstly, one disparity  in  test error  is most 
4.  Sources of Error/Areas for Improvement 
likely  attributable  to  the  amount  of  training  data  each model  uses. Our model  is 
only based off of one year of data, while CAISO has collected many years of data. 
The  additional  data  should  allow  the  regression  model  to  train  its  parameters 
temperature 
more  accurately.  An  additional  source  of  error 
is 
the 
4 

 

measurements.  We  used  the  temperatures  measurements  from  Camp  Elliot  as 
our  sole  source  of  temperature  information  and  made  the  assumption  that  the 
temperature across  the entire SDG&E service  territory was uniform.  Instead, we 
could  supplement  the  Camp  Elliot  temperature  data  with  hourly  temperature 
measurements from each zip code within the SDG&E service territory [4]. Lastly, 
the final major source of error we recognized was the energy balance. One of our 
initial assumptions was that the energy demand in a given territory was equal to 
the  energy  produced  in  the  same  territory.  In  reality,  CAISO  would  have 
information on which service  territories are  typically net exporters of electricity 
and  which  service  territories  are  net  importers  of  electricity.  This  would  allow 
our  model  to  add  a  feature  to  scale  up  or  down  its  prediction  of  electricity 
demand based on the hourly import/export characteristics of the SDG&E service 
territory.  
Using linear regression to determine a fixed weighting among all features for the 
entire  day  was  not  a  successful  algorithm.  Instead,  using  linear  regression  for 
 
each  hour  of  the  day  to  determine  feature  weighting  provided  a  more  accurate 
5.  Conclusion 
prediction  by  eliminating  the  bias  caused  by  the  hourly  labeling.  When 
determining  model  size,  using  the  first  order  of  the  features  provided  the  best 
model,  which  we  judged  using  cross  validation  and  selecting  the  lowest  test 
error.  We  found  the  predictions  from  our  model  to  be  comparable  to  the  DAM 
predictions made by CAISO since the average test error for our model was on the 
same order of magnitude as that of the CAISO prediction. 
 
[1] California ISO OASIS. [Online]. Available: http://oasis.caiso.com/ 
 [2] San Diego Gas & Electric Company Facts. [Online]. Available: 
6.  References 
http://sdge.com/our‐company/about‐us/company‐facts 
 [3] Camp Elliot California. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.wrcc.dri.edu/cgi‐bin/rawMAIN.pl?caCCAE  
 [4] Weather Underground. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.wunderground.com/history/ 
  

 

5 

