Predicting Movie Revenue   
N i k h i l   Ap t e ,  M a t s   F o r s s e l l ,   An ah i t a   S i d hwa    
D e c em b e r   16 ,   20 11  

Introduction 
„Hollywood  is the land of hunch and the wild guess‟  (Litman & Ahn).  

Jack Valenti,  president  and CEO  of  the Motion Picture  Association  of America,  once mentioned  that  „… 
No one can  tell  you how a movie  is  going  to do  in  the marketplace… not until  the film  opens  in  darkened 
theatre and sparks fly up between the screen and the audience‟  (Valenti, 1978).  

Movie revenue depends on multiple factors such as  cast, budget,  film critic review, MPAA rating, release 
year,  etc.  Because  of  these  multiple  factors  there  is  no  analytical  formula  for  predicting  how  much 
revenue  a  movie  will  generate.  However  by  analyzing  revenues  generated  by  previous  movies,  one  can 
build  a  model  which  can  help  us  predict  the  expected  revenue  for  a  movie.  Such  a  prediction  could  be 
very  useful  for  the  movie  studio  which  will  be  producing  the  movie  so  they  can  decide  on  expenses  like 
artist  compensations,  advertising,  promotions,  etc.  accordingly.  Plus  investors  can  predict  an  expected 
return-on-investment.  Also,  it  will  be  useful  for  movie  theaters  to  estimate  the  revenues  they  would 
generate from screening a particular movie.  

Data 
We obtained our dataset by extracting the relevant information from the Internet Movie Database (IMDb). 
At  first  we  considered  using  the  existing  dataset  from Maas &  al,  but  this  dataset  did  not  contain  all  the 
information  that we  needed.  For  this  reason we  deceloped  a  python  script  to  go  through  all  the movies  in 
the  database  and  download  two  html  pages  for  each  movie:  the  main  page  (“imdb.com/title/‟movie 
id‟.html”)  and  the  box  office  page  (“imdb.com/title/‟movie  id‟/business.html”).  The  data  we  needed  was 
spread  among  those  two  pages.  Specifically,  the  movie  genre  (each  movie  belongs  to  one  to  three 
predefined  genres)  and  release  date  were  taken  from  the  ma in  page,  while  the  total  box  office  revenue,  
opening  box  office  revenue,  number  of  theaters  on  release  and  budget  were  taken  from  the  box  office 
page.  

We  restricted  our  search  to  movies  released  after  January  1 st,  1990  and  only  included  those  having  total 
box  office  revenue  greater  than  $100,000  at  first.  Due  to  the  high  variability  and  incompleteness  of  the 
data  for  the  low  revenue  movies,  we  then  dropped  movies  whose  revenue  was  smaller  than  $1,000,000. 
We  also  removed  all movies  for which  some  of  the  da ta was  not  available  (typically  either  the  budget  or 
the number of  theaters on release was sometimes missing). Our final dataset  included 2510 movies . In  the 
implementation of our different algorithms, we used hold-out cross validation to estimate testing error: we 
randomly selected 70% of the dataset to do the training and tested the algorithm on the rema ining 30%.  

To  take  into  account  the  inflation  rate,  and  the  fact  that  for  this  reason  more  recent  movies  will  find  it 
easier to perform better, we adjusted the global box office  revenue, the opening week-end revenue and the 
budget  by  dividing  the  values  by  the  average  price  of  a movie  ticket  on  the  year  the movie  was  released 
and  multiplying  by  the  current  average  movie  ticket  price  (this  is  somewhat  of  an  approximation  for 

adjusting  the  budget,  since  the  budget  is  depending  on  real  inflation  and  not  just  movie  ticket  inflation,  
but we are taking these to be similar). For reference, the average movie ticket price has increased by more 
than 85% between 1990 and today.   

Algorithms  

Linear Regression 
We  first  implemented  a  linear  regression  algorithm,  with  the  first week -end  revenue,  budget  and  number  
of  theaters  on  opening  week  as  our  parameters.  The  output  of  the  algorithm  is  the  global  box  office 
revenue. 

The average testing error for this algorithm was around 110-130%. 

The  testing  error  plots  show  that  the  performance  of  the  linear regression  is  very  good  for movies  having 
high  global revenue (and also  in  general high  first week-end revenue, number of  theaters and budget): we 
have  error  of  less  than  100%  on  these.  For movies  with  low  global  revenue  however,  the  test ing  error  is 
sometimes  very  high, more  than  2000%  in  cases.  Lower  revenue  movies  will  require  more  sophisticated 
algorithms and more data to be analyzed better .  

 

Figure 1: Training data – Global box office revenue vs1st 
weekend revenue, budget & no of theatres on release date 
 

 

Figure 2: Prediction error for linear regression  

From  the plots of  the  training  data, we also notice  that while  the global  revenue  is a strong  linear function 
of  the  first  week-end  revenue,  and  also  a  linear  function  of  the  budget  (with  somewhat  more  noise),  the 
global  revenue  is  not  really  linear  in  the  third  parameter,  the  number  of  theaters. We  can  in  fact  roughly 
distinguish  two regions  from  the plot of global revenue versus number of  theaters: a „low revenue‟ region 
and  a  „high  revenue‟  region. Therefore we  decided  to  separate  the  data  between  these  two  regions  and  to 
run a linear regression and all subsequent algorithms s eparately on the two datasets.  

 

K-means clustering 
We  separated  the  data  using  K-means  clustering  with  two  clusters,  using  only  the  number  of  theaters  as 
our dataset for this algorithm.   

Using  this  method,  we  find  a  testing  error  of  around  30 -40%  for  the  cluster  corresponding  to  movies 
released  in  a  larger  number  of  theaters, and  an  error  of around  200 -250%  for  the  cluster  corresponding  to 
movies released in a low number of theaters  

Figure 3: Training data after K-means clustering 

Figure 4: Prediction error after applying linear 
regression on the 2 clusters separately 

 

 

 

Weighted linear regression 
Although  the  global  box  office  revenue  has  quite  a  linear  variation  with  the  first  weekend  revenue,  its 
relation with budget and  the  number of screens  is not  exactly  linear. To account for  the nonlinearities, we 
decided  to use a  locally weighted  linear regression model. In  this model a separate hypothesis  is made for  
each test sample with higher weights attached to the training data points which are closer to t his particular 
test sample. The weighting factors are chosen according to   

               

          
       

The  bandwidth  parameter  τ  is  chosen  to  minimize  the  mean  test ing  error.  The  local  weighting  generally 
improves the accuracy of our prediction.  

Polynomial Regression 
Because the relation with budget and the number of screens  is not exactly linear, we also used polynomia l 
regression  to  account  for  the  nonlinearities.  We  performed  polynomial  regression  for  order  2,3,and   4.  
From  the  results,  we  can  see  that  overall,  polynomial  regression  of  order  3  provides  the  smallest  mean 
error for total dataset, and high number of movie theaters.  

Results 

 

Algorithm 

All movies taken together  

Movies 
released  on  high 
Number of theaters 
Std Dev  Mean 
Median 
Error 
Error 
29.6 
25.9 

Std 
Dev 
22.2 

125.6 

Movies 
released 
number of theaters  
Mean 
Median 
Error 
Error 
191.3 
69.4 

on 

low 

Std 
Dev 
377.6 

Mean 
Error 
63.1 

Median 
Error 
34.0 

61.8 

45.1 

2nd order Polynomia l 
regression 
3rd order Polynomial 
regression 
4th order Polynomial 
regression 
Linear regression 
Weighted linear 
regression 
Table 1: Prediction errors for the different algorithms 

130.9 
106.6 

269.7 
233.0 

37.7 
35.1 

103.1 

73.5 

82.1 

30.1 

28.4 

24.8 

24.2 

99.4 

71.7 

178.3 

47.4 

48.6 

28.8 

85.9 

91.1 

74.0 

37.6 
25.8 

26.8 
26.8 

44.7 
23.9 

262.4 
240.9 

103.2 
85.8 

40.4 
388.6 

From  the results above, we observe  that no specific method performed well  for all  three  types  of datasets. 
We  observed  that  the  higher  the  number  of  theaters,  the more  accurate  the  p rediction. This  is  because  the 
correlation  between  revenue,  number  of  theaters,  and  budget  is  usually  much  better  for  movies  that 
released on high number of theaters.   

Genre Separation 
Intuitively,  it  is  easy  to  see  that movies  from  different  genres will  perform  differently  in  the  theaters. For 
this  reason  we  split  our  data  according  to  genre,  and  ran  our  regression  models  for  each  data  subset 
separately.  

 

Figure 5: Mean error for each Genre (cluster with higher 
number of theaters) 

 

 
Figure 6: Mean error for each Genre (cluster with lower 
number of theaters) 

Genre  separation  improved  the  accuracy  for  some  subsets,  especially  for  the  movies  which  released  on 
more  number  of  theaters.  However  for  subsets  which  did  not  have  enough  samples,  the  accuracy  
worsened.  The  third  and  fourth  order  polynomials  over -fit  the  data  for  some  genres,  resulting  in  high 
testing errors. These outliers were excluded from the plots.    

Conclusion 
By combining k-means clustering  to separate  the dataset between  „low-release‟ and „high-release‟ movies 
and  separating  the  genres  to  take  into  account  the  diversity  of  movies,  we  managed  to  significantly 
improve  the  prediction  accuracy  using  polynomial  regression  and  weighted  linear  regression.  In  some 
cases  it  is  possible  to  predict  total  revenue  with  accuracy  better  than  20%. However,  some  genres  did  not  
have  enough samples  in our dataset, making prediction  for these genres very difficult. Moreover, even for 
the  genres  that  we  could  train  on,  the  ‟low-release‟  movies  cluster  failed  to  perform  well  on  average  in 
every  single  case.  It  is worth  noting  that  the  information  available  for  these  sma ller movies might  not  be 
fully accurate, adding some element of noise to the dataset.   

In order  to  improve  the predictions, attempting  to separa te  the data along more  than  two clusters might be 
useful;  however  since  this  also  reduces  the  number  of  available  training  examples  for  each  subset,  the 
performance  increase  will  be  limited.  Also,  the  models  can  be  improved  by  taking  into  account  a  lot  of 
other factors,  like  the movie cast,  the movie‟s  release date (i.e. whether  the movie released during holiday 
season,  etc.),    the  movie‟s  competition  when  it  released,  etc.  Another  step  further  could  consist  of 
considering the specificities of foreign movies, and of foreign markets.   

Acknowledgement   
We  want  to  thank  Professor  Ng  for  the  opportunity  to  research  this  project,  and  the  CS229  CAs,  in 
particular Andrew Maas, for  their  help and support. Chris Pouliot offered his advice  on how  to get started 
and  ideas  on  what  we  should  be  aiming  for.  Chris  Potts  also  provided  us  with  his  baseline  python  script 
for web crawling.  

Works Cited  
Litman, B. R., & Ahn, H. (n.d.). Predicting financial success of motion pictures.  

Valenti,  J.  (1978).  Motion  Pictures  and  Their  Impact  on  Society  in  the  Year  2000,  speech  given  at  the 
Midwest Research Inst itute, Kansas City.  

Andrew  L. Maas, Raymond  E.  Daly,  Peter T.  Pham, Dan  Huang,  Andrew  Y.  Ng,  and  Christopher  Potts. 
(2011).  Learning Word  Vectors  for Sentiment  Analysis.  The  49th  Annual Meeting  of  the  Association  for 
Computational Linguistics (ACL 2011). 

The Internet Movie Database: http://imdb.com 

National Association of Theater Owners: http://www.natoonline.org/statisticstickets.htm 

Ng, Andrew, CS229 Lecture Notes  

 

