Analyzing Gene Expression Time Series
CS 229 Fall 2011 Final Pro ject

Marco Cusumano-Towner
Advised by Soﬁa Kyriazopoulou-Panagiotopoulou

December 16, 2011

1

Introduction

There are approximately twenty-thousand genes in humans, each which can be expressed at diﬀerent
levels at diﬀerent times, under diﬀerent conditions, and in diﬀerent tissue types (in fact it is exactly
diﬀerences in gene expression that determine tissue type). Broadly speaking, the expression levels
of genes in a cell approximate the current state of the cell. Modern high-throughput techniques like
CAGE ([7]) can comprehensively measure the expression levels for all genes at a given time point.
The amount a gene is expressed can be measured by counting the number of mRNA transcripts
associated with that gene (these are, very roughly speaking, copies of the gene waiting to be
translated into proteins).
Most often gene expression analyses begin by measuring expression levels under two or more
conditions (e.g. healthy or disease condition, or environmental or stress conditions), and aim to
identify which genes are diﬀerentially expressed between the two and why (e.g. [1]). Gene expression
time series instead measure the expression levels in a single condition over time, often after the
introduction of a stimulus ([3]) or during a cellular process ([4]), and aim to discover the dynamical
response of the cell to this stimulus, and possibly the underlying regulatory networks that govern
this response ([2]).
In this pro ject, we have sub jected a particular gene expression time series dataset to a series of
analyses, primarily involving clustering of the genes. Clustering can reveal groups of co-regulated
genes (genes that are regulated by the same factors), or genes involved in the same functional
pathway ([5]). Clustering of gene expression time series is a challenging task, given the notoriously
noisy nature of gene expression measurements, and the often sparse and unevenly-spaced time
points ([6]).

2 Methods and Results

2.1 Preprocessing

We considered two datasets for this pro ject: a time course of human leukemia cells after introduc-
tion of hemin, and vascular endothelial cells (cells that line the blood vessels) after application of
VEGFC (vascular endothelial growth factor C). Both datasets included three replicates of the same
experiment. We analyzed the statistics of both datasets (such as correlations between replicates)

1

and determined that the endothelial cell time course likely had less noise than the leukemia time
course, and we used this dataset for further analysis.
Because diﬀerent genes can be expressed at diﬀerent general amplitudes, gene expression anal-
yses are usually concerned with the ‘log fold changes’ for each gene g . We use the log fold changes
t − log2 y (g)
with respect to the ﬁrst time point (log2 y (g)
1 ).
The transcriptional (gene-expression) response to any given stimulus generally involves a subset
of all the genes. Therefore, an essential ﬁrst step in analysis of whole-genome gene expression data
is determining those genes that are likely part of the biological response and removing the rest
before further analysis. To do this, we only included a gene if it reached below half or above twice
its initial value in all replicates. We replaced all zero values with the value two before calculating
log fold changes. After ﬁltering, 1485 genes remained. We also discarded the last two time points
because they exhibited sudden biologically uninterpretable changes in value, and further removed
genes with the worst ﬁts to the impulse model (described below). The ﬁnal product was 1305 genes
with 14 values, sampled at 0min, 15min, 30min, 45min, 1hr, 1hr20min, 1hr40min, 2hr, 2hr30min,
3hr, 3hr30min, 4hr, 5hr, and 6hr. We used the log fold change data from one replicate for our
further analyses.

2.2 Validating algorithm output

We need to verify that the output of clustering algorithms is biologically meaningful, before using
the output to guide hypotheses regarding new biological meaning. The genes within some clusters
should be related to one another biologically. In whole-genome bioinformatics, biological relation-
ships are often determined by annotations (e.g. gene X is involved in ‘blood vessel development’ or
‘chromatin modiﬁcation’) that biologists have assigned to genes. We test if clusters are statistically
‘enriched’ for any biological functional annotations. In particular, a hypergeometric test (or one-
tailed Fisher’s exact test) is used to asses whether signiﬁcantly more genes in a set are associated
with any annotation than would be expected if the gene set was selected randomly. We use the
online tool g:Proﬁler ([8]) for this analysis.

2.3 Choosing the number of clusters

We attempted to choose the number of clusters (k) by observing how the distortion function de-
creased with increasing k , by using hierarchical clustering, and by assessing the consistency of cluster
assignments between replicates for various k . However, visually identifying k-values that struck a
balance between low within-cluster variance and low between-cluster similarity proved more direct
and intuitive.

2.4 K-means clustering

Our ﬁrst attempt at clustering used plain k-means. We used the standard Euclidean metric as
well as the Pearson correlation coeﬃcient metric in which the distance between genes i and j is
d(y (i) , y (j ) ) = 1 − r(y (i) , y (j ) ), and r(y (i) , y (j ) ) is the Pearson sample correlation coeﬃcient. The
correlation metric is a common choice for this data domain, because any ﬁne-grained ﬂuctuations in
the data are likely masked by noise. Clusters from k-means with the correlation metric are shown
on the left in Figure 1. The clusters returned from k-means were not signiﬁcantly enriched for any
relevant biological annotations speciﬁc to the stimulus condition. This is likely because k-means ﬁt

2

to random patterns in the data, which are present because of the large number of genes and the
small number of time points, coupled with the high level of noise ([10]). A sign that this is occuring
in our results is that many of the clusters are distinguished by sudden changes in value during the
middle or end of the time course, which are unlikely to be true biological events.

Figure 1: Clusters from k-means run on the raw data (left) and the impulse-ﬁtted data (right).
Centroid shown in red, individual gene time series shown in blue. The x-axis measures minutes after
stimulus, and the y-axis measures (zero-mean unit-variance transformed) log-fold-change values.

2.5 Clustering using least-squares ﬁts to a continuous model

To prevent ﬁtting to random noise or systematic nonbiological ﬂuctuations, we would like to restrict
the clustering algorithm to only detect biologically meaningful patterns in the data. In addition,
the basic k-means distance metrics described above are limited in that they ignore the temporal
dependencies in the data, and treat each time point as an independent dimension.
To deal with the noise problem, prior work ﬁts a parameterized continuous model to the data,
which is then used as input for enrichment analysis or clustering algorithms.
In particular, [3]
introduce a model for gene expression time series that parameterizes a set of ‘impulse’ shaped
curves with six biologically meaningful parameters (initial steady-state value, onset-time, peak-
value, oﬀset-time, ﬁnal stead-state value, and a rate parameter). The authors claim this model
captures the observed typical reaction of gene expression levels to many stimuli. We ﬁt this model
to our data by minimizing the sum-of-squares reconstruction error with respect to the parameters.
We also ﬁt a variant given in [10] that places more constraints on the parameters (e.g. oﬀset-time
must be greater than onset-time).
We ran k-means on these model ﬁts, where we also sampled the continuous ﬁtted functions
more densly than the original time series. The resulting clusters and centroids are shown on the
right in Figure 1. The only cluster that shows enrichment for biological functions related to our
experimental condition (vascular endothelial cells, stimulated with a vascular endothelial growth
factor), is the top-left cluster, which also corresponds to a cluster when ﬁtted using the constrained
impulse model. This cluster is enriched for ‘blood vessel development’, among a host of other less

3

speciﬁc terms. If this cluster is representative of the true signal in the data, the amount of within-
cluster variance around the centroid illustrates the predominance of noise in the data. We did not
see ma jor improvements in enrichment analysis using the more constrained model.

2.6 Analyzing CDFs of ﬁtted parameters

As a complementary analysis to testing the enrichment of clusters, we followed [10] and investigated
whether genes with a certain annotation had any signiﬁcantly diﬀerent impulse model parameters
from genes without the annotation (e.g. perhaps the ‘onset-time’ parameter is earlier than on
average for genes involved with ‘cell cycle’). For this we used the KS (Kolmogorov-Smirnov) test to
compare the empirical distributions (empirical CDF) of the parameter for genes with and without
the annotation. We did this for all annotations. We found several annotations related to our
condition that were enriched for parameter distribution, although a number of unrelated terms
were also enriched, so the signiﬁcance of these is not yet clear. However, this analysis did lead to
discovery of a set of nine genes related to a certain phase of the cell cycle that all have a very similar
time proﬁle (decrease rapidly in the ﬁrst time sample, then rebound). These genes were located in
the same cluster in our model ﬁts, but their common annotations were not identiﬁed as statistically
signiﬁcant due to the large size of the cluster.

2.7

Integrated clustering and modeling algorithm

The ﬁnal algorithm we evaluated ([10]) is a recent impulse-based iterative clustering algorithm for
gene expression time series related to k-means, in which cluster centroids are represented as priors
over the parameters of the impulse model described above. In the assignment step, the genes are
ﬁtted to the impulse model while regularizing the parameters with respect to each of the priors.
The prior that results in the least total regularized cost for a gene becomes that gene’s cluster. In
the ‘M’ step, the priors are ﬁt to the average of the genes in their respective cluster. This model
aims to further prevent overﬁtting of the impulse ﬁt to the data.
Due to the high computational demands for this algorithm, we were only able to run it for
ﬁve iterations. However, the resulting clusters after ﬁve iterations are very similar to the clusters
obtained by running k-means on the ﬁts, as described above (again, there was one enriched cluster
of genes that rise then fall, with many of the same genes). This suggests that overﬁtting was not a
problem with the ﬁt-then-cluster approach for our data. However, this algorithm also has a number
of regularization parameters which could be further tweaked, and could potentially improve the
results.

3 Discussion

Although the impulse model has been used successfully in prior works ([3], [10]), our results suggest
that it might not appropriate for use with our data. Perhaps a subset of the gene expression proﬁles
are indeed captured by the impulse model but others follow a multimodal pattern, perhaps related
to the (periodic) cell cycle. In addition, the discovery of a small set of nine genes with highly related
functional annotations and very similar time proﬁles that were not identiﬁed in enrichment analysis
of clusters suggests that our cluster sizes may be too large. However, decreasing cluster sizes risks
splitting related genes.

4

4 Future work

There are a number of other clustering algorithms for gene expression time series that are worth
exploring. Several algorithms use iterative soft EM-like assignments. Of note is a method that uses
mixtures of HMM’s ([9]). As these authors point out, hard assignments of genes to clusters is not
entirely biologically meaningful, because the interaction network between genes is not composed of
separate connected components, and a mixture model may be more appropriate. This model also
does not constrain the time proﬁles to have an impulse shape, but instead learns proﬁle templates
from the data, and can represent both impulse proﬁles and periodic proﬁles. Integrating a soft-
assignment mixture model with enrichment analysis would be an interesting course of research that
could potentially identify very small groups of related genes without over-partitioning the genes
and breaking apart other related gene groups.

References

[1] Oleg M Alekseev, Richard T Richardson, Oleg Alekseev, and Michael G O’Rand. Analysis
of gene expression proﬁles in HeLa cells in response to overexpression or siRNA-mediated
depletion of NASP. Reproductive biology and endocrinology : RB&E, 7:45, January 2009.

[2] Mukesh Bansal, Giusy Della Gatta, and Diego di Bernardo. Inference of gene regulatory net-
works and compound mode of action from time course gene expression proﬁles. Bioinformatics
(Oxford, England), 22(7):815–22, April 2006.

[3] Gal Chechik and Daphne Koller. Timing of gene expression responses to environmental changes.
Journal of computational biology a journal of computational molecular cel l biology, 16(2):279–
290, 2009.

[4] Raymond J. Cho, Michael J. Campbell, Elizabeth A. Winzeler, Lars Steinmetz, Andrew Con-
way, Lisa Wodicka, Tyra G. Wolfsberg, Andrei E. Gabrielian, David Landsman, David J.
Lockhart, and Ronald W. Davis. A Genome-Wide Transcriptional Analysis of the Mitotic Cell
Cycle. Molecular Cel l, 2(1):65–73, July 1998.

[5] P. D’haeseleer, S. Liang, and R. Somogyi. Genetic network inference:
from co-expression
clustering to reverse engineering. Bioinformatics, 16(8):707–726, August 2000.

[6] Jason Ernst, Gerard J Nau, and Ziv Bar-Joseph. Clustering short time series gene expression
data. Bioinformatics, 21 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):i159–i168, 2005.

[7] Charles Plessy et al. Linking promoters to functional transcripts in small samples with
nanoCAGE and CAGEscan. Nature methods, 7(7):528–34, July 2010.

[8] J¨uri Reimand, Tambet Arak, and Jaak Vilo. g:Proﬁler–a web server for functional interpreta-
tion of gene lists (2011 update). Nucleic acids research, 39(suppl 2):W307–315, June 2011.

[9] A. Schliep. Using hidden Markov models to analyze gene expression time course data. Bioin-
formatics, 19(90001):255i–263, July 2003.

[10] Julia Sivriver, Naomi Habib, and Nir Friedman. An integrative clustering and modeling algo-
rithm for dynamical gene expression data. Bioinformatics, 27(13):i392–i400, 2011.

5

