CS229 Pro ject Report
Detect Leaders in Cow Group Movement using Pairwise Distances

Yang Li

Introduction

Pro ject Background

Studies in animal social behavior show that group-living animals, such as cows, travel together
in a collective pattern known as spontaneous group movement [2] Such movement exhibits the
leader-follower phenomenon, that is, some individual are more likely than others, to initiate group
movement that causes others to follow. We call these cows leaders of the group movement. An useful
tool in cattle management is to automatically identify the group movement leaders by analyzing
cow motion data. The goal of this pro ject is thus to ﬁnd out whether we can model the leader
probability of individual cows based on the pattern of recent group movements.
We deﬁne the leading cows of a group movement to be occupants of the front positions in the
direction which the group is moving. Although it is easy to determine a cow’s relative position
within the group given its accurate geographical location tracked using GPS, it is often infeasible
to deploy GPS devices to cattle on a large scale due to cost, power and signal limitation. An
alternate way of data collection proposed by students in ETH Zurich University1 , is dispersing the
environment with sparse landmarks and equipping the cows with inexpensive sensors that records
contact events with other sensors and landmarks[1]. Previous work by Stanford students Daniel
Chen and Johnathan Jiang showed that it is possible to estimate the distances between sensors
from contact information. Knowing the cow-to-cow distance, we deﬁne the neighbour distance
distribution of Cow i to be the distribution of distances between Cow i and other cows within the
group. We can describe this distribution using a Gaussian model, p(di ) ∼ N (µi , σ2
i ) where µi and
σ2
i are empirical estimations of mean and variance. We expect leading cows to have very diﬀerent
µi and σi from non-leading cows. Figure 1 compares the neighbour distance of Cow 2 and Cow
2 = 21.42 and σ2
11 at frame 700. In this case, we have µ2 = 8.09, µ11 = 4.80, σ2
11 = 7.18. Base
on this intuition, this pro ject applies several supervised learning models to estimate a cow’s leader
probability from its neighbour distance distribution.

Figure 1: The neighbour distance of a leading cow (left) and a non-leading cow (right)

1Data courtesy of Dr. Silvia Santini, Institute for Pervasive Computing, ETH Zurich.

1

Out[126]=5101520246810Cow2Cow11Dataset Description

Our original dataset contains the GPS traces of 34 cows and clustering results from previous work.
GPS Traces.
In an experiment conducted by previous researchers, the exact locations of
34 cows were tracked using GPS continuously for 2 days at 2Hz frequency. For the prototyping
purpose, we used a ﬁltered dataset sampled at 5 seconds intervals, which contains 36262 frames
and have size 30MB.
Clustering Results.
In previous research, single linkage clustering were used to partition the
cows into clusters in each frame. According to the clustering results, we can see that most cows
move in large groups, with individuals leaving and joining a group at random occasions. In most
frames, there is one or two large clusters of cows and a few outcasts.
For this pro ject, we primarily looked at the ﬁrst 733 frames of data, during this time all but
2 cows are within a single cluster, labelled C1. To simulate the senario of working with pure
sensor collected data, we limited the training data to pairwise distances of 32 cows at every frame,
synthesized from the GPS traces.

Methods

Feature design

Let m be the number of frames that the training data spans. The design matrix for modelling
the leader probability of cow i is an m by 2 matrix. Each row vector x(t)
represents a training
i
(t)(cid:17)
(cid:16)
example characterizing Cow i’s distance and relative speed with respect to its neighbors at time t
(t = 1,..m.)

(t)

γ (t)
i

τ 2
i

x(t)
i =

µ(t)
i σ2
i

(t) - mean and variance of Cow i’s neighbor distance distribution at time t.

• µ(t)
i σ2
i
• γ (t)
(t) - mean and variance of the speed correlation of Cow i and other cows over a time
i τ 2
i
window [t − r, t + r], where the positive integer r represents the window radius. The relative
speed between Cow i and Cow j at time t is approximated using the forward diﬀerence:
i,j = d(i, j )(t) − d(i, j )(t−1) .
s(t)
(t) ) for ﬁtting the constant term.
is augmented to (1 µ(t)
In the case of logistic regression, x(t)
i σ2
i
i
Without the loss of generality, we will drop the subscript i in the rest of this section.
In most of the design matrices, the value of (σ (t) )2 is much larger the value of µ(t) , it is therefore
necessary to normalize the feature vectors to have mean 0 and standard deviation 1. For instance,
let ¯xk and τk be the mean and standard deviation of the kth feature vector, then the normalized
feature vector is xk := xk− ¯xk
.
τk

Target labelling

The training target y t
i is a binary value that indicates whether cow i is at a leading position in
frame t. The ground truth labels are generated geometrically using the ”ﬁrst-k algorithm”. In this
algorithm, each cow is represented by a 2D point. Deﬁne v (t) , the velocity of the cluster at frame t
to be the diﬀerence of the cluster mean between frame t − 1 and frame t. We then ranked all points
in the cluster by their relative positions in the direction of the cluster velocity (See Figure 2.) Then
the leaders are the k points with highest ranks. Here we chose k = 5 to ensure we have suﬃcient

2

”positive” examples for training, while preserving the sensitivity requirement of the problem. In
particular, yi = 1 implies Cow i occupies one of the ﬁrst 5 positions of the group at time t.

Figure 2: Leader classiﬁcation of cows in cluster C1 at frame t = 696. Each cow is represented
by a label led dot. The Gray line is the trajectory traced by the cluster mean, and the black arrow
represents to the cluster velocity. The points are colored by position ranking. The top 5 ranked
points are highlighted in yel low.

Logistic Regression
maximize with respect to θ , the log-likelihood: l(θ) = (cid:80)m
With logistic regression (LR), we modelled the likelihood of a cow being at a leading position given
parameter θ using the familiar sigmoid function p(y |x; θ) = h(xi ) =
1
1+e−θT x . We proceeded to
i=1 y i logh(xi ) + (1 − y i )log(1 − h(xi )).
Using Newton’s method, we obtained the optimal parameter θ ∈ R5 . The probability that
cow i is at the leading position given a new distance distribution x = [µ σ ] can be evaluated as
p(y |x; θ) = hθ (xi ) at x.

Figure 3: ROC curve for Data source GPS traces of 34 cows in 2 days leader detection using
Training data Pairwise distances of 32 cows during LR.

In the leader detection problem, the size of the leader class is much smaller than the size of
the non-leader class. This leads to a problem when we use p(y |x; θ) > 0.5 as the leader detection

3

00.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9100.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9100.020.040.060.080.10.120.140.160.180.20.220.240.260.30.350.40.450.50.550.60.70.80.91False Positive Rate (FPR)True Positive Rate (TPR)  ROC for leader detection of individual cowsMedian ROC (labeled by shreshold)TPR = 1−FPRthe criterion by a threshold parameter T , such that yT =

(cid:26)1 p(y |x; θ) ≥ T
(cid:27)
criterion: LR often ﬁnds a trivial classiﬁer that labels all cows as non-leaders. We therefore biased
0 p(y |x; θ) < T
.
We used ROC curves[3], shown in Figure 3, to determine the best T for all models. The training
examples were randomly partitioned into a training set of size 512 (70% of the original training
set) and a test set of size 220. For each model, we repeatedly trained and tested our model with T
ranging from 0 to 1 at step size 0.02. Then the true positive rate (TPR) was plotted against false
positive rate (FPR) over the threshold space, forming a ROC curve. The median ROC curve for
all models is highlighted in red.
We approximated the optimal threshold T to be the intersection of the ROC curve with the
line F P R = 1 − T P R. This can be interpreted as setting the number of false positives equal to the
number of false negatives. In our problem, we found T = 0.14, which non-surprisingly coincided
with the threshold value that maximizes the F1 score2 .

Linear SVM

The second model we attempted is l2 regularized linear support vector machine (SVM). Regulariza-
tion is necessary since the models are clearly non-separable. Since our problem is low dimensional
2 wT w + C (cid:80)m
and has small scale, we did not need to worry about the additional computation cost of l2 regular-
ization over l1 . The model ﬁtting was done using the LIBLINEAR package, solving optimization
i=1 max(0, 1 − yiwT xi )2 for optimal margin parameter w. Constant
1
problem min w
C (with default value 1) is the penalty parameter. The predicted outcome is 1 if wT x >= B , where
B is the bias constant.
We used a 2-step grid search method to ﬁnd the (C, B ) pair that maximizes the F 1 score of
the model. In the coarse step, we searched within the range 0 ≤ C ≤ 3 and −3 ≤ B ≤ 3 at step
size 0.5. We then performed a ﬁner search with step size 0.1. The ﬁnal parameters we obtained is
C = 0.10 and B = 0.41.

Figure 4: Comparison between true labels, LR predicted labels and SVM predicted labels for Cow
12.

Results

We used 5-fold cross-validation to evaluate the LR and SVM models. In each trail, the number of
training examples was 549, and the number of test examples were 183. The mean and variance of
2Here we used F = 0.5 ∗ R ∗ P /(P + R)

4

cross validation errors, precisions and recalls over all 64 models are summarized in Table 1. We
found no signiﬁcant diﬀerence in the average test errors and F-scores between the two methods.
In addition, we experimented with mixing all training examples together to train a global leader
detection model for all cows. The training and testing size became 16416 and 7008, and the model
evaluation results are shown in Table 2. The results shows little diﬀerence from the average of
individual models. Hence increasing training examples did not seem to improve ﬁtness of the
model.

˜

Test Error
Precision
Recall
F-Score
mean std mean std mean std mean std
0.10
0.35
0.24
0.72
0.08
0.24
0.19
LR
0.43
SVM 0.36
0.04
0.25
0.09
0.70
0.11
0.37
0.08

Table 1: Test Error, Precision and Recall of LR and SVM Models for individual cows

Test Error Precision Recall F-Score
0.38
.71
0.26
SVM 0.35

Table 2: Test Error, Precision and Recall of SVM Model for all cows

Conclusion

In this pro ject, we tackled the cow leader detection problem through learning the pairwise distance
and speed correlation of cows. We designed a feature extraction scheme, ﬁtted our model using
logistic regression and linear SVM, and performed cross validation to evaluate the ﬁtted models.
It was surprising to see that LR models are on average competitive to SVM models, while both
methods were insuﬃcient to detect leaders with high sensitivity under reasonable speciﬁcity. One
inherited challenge of our problem is the low prior probability of leaders in our training examples.
Comparison between the F-scores of individual models with the prior probability in the respective
training sets reveals that, detection models trained on data with higher prior probability are better
ﬁtted than those trained on data with low prior probability.
In order to deploy leader detection in practice, additional features need to be considered. Future
work may incorporate cow-to-landmark distances, a piece of information that we did not employ
under the scope of this class pro ject. As a ﬁnal remark ,this pro ject has been part of a research
pro ject that studies motion patterns in the tra jectory data of mobile ob jects. The cow leader
detection problem presented here can be generalized to other scenarios that involve the leader and
follower phenomenon, such as crowd movement and trends on social network. Machine learning
techniques will most likely play important roles in studying these topics.

References

[1] Brano Kusy, Silvia Santini, and Leo Guibas. Tra jectory estimation using network traces of mobile devices.
Unpublished, 2011.

[2] A. Ramseyer, A. Boissy, B. Thierry, and B. Dumont. Individual and social determinants of spontaneous
group movements in cattle and sheep. animal, 3(09):1319–1326, 2009.

[3] Wikipedia. Receiver operating characteristic. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Receiver_operating_
characteristic.

5

