A Learned Approach for Lump Identification  
In Soft Tissue via Palpation  
Kirk A. Nichols 
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University 
Kirk.nichols@stanford.edu 
 
 

ABSTRACT 

With  the  increase  in  robot-assisted  minimally  invasive  surgeries, 
restoring  haptic  information  lost  by  the  lack  of  the  surgeon’s 
direct contact with the patient is crucial. Here I seek to restore lost 
stiffness  information  by  gathering  force  and  position  data  taken 
from  a  robot  palpating  an  artificial  tissue  embedded  with  a  stiff 
object  simulating  a  circular  tumor.  Using  machine  learning 
algorithms, I estimate the location and radius of the tumor. Results 
show  that  of  the  learning  methods  explored,  the  supervised 
learning  methods  perform  better 
than 
their  unsupervised 
counterparts,  with  an  average  error  of  false  positives  plus  false 
negatives of 10%. However, the most robust method of these uses 
a  supervised  learning  algorithm  to  first  threshold  the  palpation 
data based on stiffness and then estimating the radius of the tumor 
using  a  second  machine  learning  algorithm.  I  intend  to  continue 
and expand this work in the CHARM lab, PI Allison Okamura. 

1 

INTRODUCTION  

In  the  medical  community,  tactile  sensations  provide  an  array  of 
diagnostic  capabilities.   Cancerous  regions  in  soft  tissues  like  in 
the  prostate  and  breast  tissues,  for  example,  typically  manifest 
themselves  as  hard  lumps  and  are  significantly  harder  than  the 
surrounding  tissue.  During  open  surgery,  surgeons  can  directly 
contact  and  palpate  the  tissue. Minimally  invasive  surgery  (MIS) 
and  robot-assisted  minimally 
invasive  surgery  (RMIS)  are 
becoming increasingly popular as they provide increased dexterity 
and  control  for  surgeons  while  reducing  patient  trauma  [1]. 
However, the lack of tactile feedback limits surgeons’ capabilities, 
and  it  has  been  shown  that  RMIS  presents  with  a  greater 
likelihood  of  leaving  behind  cancerous  cells  upon  biopsy  of  a 
diseased  region  [4].  Finding  some  method  to  convey  the  shape 
and  location  of  a  suspected  lump  would  restore  some  of  the 
information  lost  with  the  use  of  minimally  invasive  surgical 
methods. 
   I  investigated  use  of  a  robotic  system  with  an  attached  force -
torque  sensor  to  provide  a  data  set  from  which  machine  learning 
tools  can  identify  the  size  and  location  of  a  lump  in  an  artificial 
tissue  sample.  Section  2  describes  the  experimental  setup  used, 
including  the hardware and software methods used  to gather data. 
Section  3  describes 
the  experimental  methods  used,  and 
introduces five learning methods tasked with identifying the shape 
and  size  of  the  lump  in  the  artificial  tissue. Results  are  presented 
in  Section  4  and  discussed  in  Section  5.  Future  work  and 
conclusions  drawn  from  the  experiment  comprise  of  Sections  6 
and 7, respectively.  

2 

EXPER IMENTAL SETUP 

The  setup  of  the  experiment  involved  creating  a  platform  where 
upon  palpating  an  artificial  tissue,  information  regarding  the 
stiffness of  the palpation  location as well as the   location  itself can 
be gathered. 
 
 

 

 
Figure 1: Experimental setup showing the Phantom 
Premium, the Nano 17 force-torque sensor, and the 
artificial tissue. 

2.1 

Hardware 

The  hardware  used  for  this  project  are  a  Phantom  Premium  1.5A 
(Sensable  Technologies,  Inc.)  haptic  device and  a Nano  17  force-
torque  sensor  (ATI  Industrial  Automation).   The  Phantom 
Premium  in  its  current  configuration  is  a  3-DOF  desktop  haptic 
device  (Figure  1).  The  Nano  17  force-torque  sensor  measures 
forces  and  torques  along  all  three  axes. However,  for  the purpose 
of  this  project  only  the  force  along  the  z-axis  of  the  sensor 
(pointing  into  the  end  effector  of  the  Phantom  Premium  as 
pictured in Figure 1) was gathered. 

2.2 

Artificial Tissue 

 

 

 

Figure 2: Close-up of 
force-torque sensor with 
uncovered artificial tissue 

Figure 3: Force-torque sensor with 
covered artificial tissue 

 

1 

 
Figure 4: A typical Force vs Position curve collected from a single 
palpation. 

The  artificial  tissue  sample  consisted  of  a  sponge  with  a  h ard, 
circular  object  embedded  inside  (Figure  2).  Circular  objects  are 
commonly  used  to  approximate  tumors   [2].  This  sample  was 
covered  with  a  thin  piece  of  packaging  material  to  add  more 
variance  between  the  stiffnesses  of  the  embedded  object  and 
surrounding sponge (Figure 3).  

2.3 

Data Collection 

The  data  sets  were  gathered  by  manually  palpating  the  artificial 
tissue  with  the  robot  arm.  The  robot’s  encoders  were  used  to 
gather data about the position of  the end effector.  Figures 5 and 6 
show  the  different  sets  of  data  varied  with  respect  to  the  rotation 
of the artificial tissue. 

2.4 

Tumor Registration 

For  a  ground-truth  measurement  of  the  location  and  size  of  the 
tumor, the tumor shape was traced by the end effector of the robot 
and  subsequently  registered.  Points  within  the  registered  shape 
would  be  classified  as  part  of  tumor  and  points  outside  the 
registered region would be classified as not part of the tumor. 

3 

EXPER IMENTAL METHODS 

Five  different methods were employed  to  predict  the shape  of  the 
tumor.  The  first  three  of  these  methods  fall  under  supervised 
learning,  while  the  last  two  are  unsupervised,  although  the  fifth 
method does utilize  the notion of  a “training set”,  the  labeling  for 
this set is constructed in an entirely unsupervised fashion. 
   For all the methods, an initialization step was  first performed  to 
convert the force/position data for each individual palpation into a 
stiffness  value  that  would  associate  with  an  XY  location  on  the 
sponge. 

3.1 

Initialization 

 
Figure  5:  Training  Set Used  for All Algorithms.   Stiffer points  are 
shown  in  red,  while  softer  points  are  in  blue.  The  black  circle  is 
the  trace  of  the  circumference  of  the  tumor  taken  during 
registration. 

For  each  palpation,  the  force-position  data  acquired  from  the 
Nano17  was  fitted  by  least  squares  to  a  straight  line,  with  the 
assumption 
the  palpated  environment  can  be  well 
that 
approximated  by  a  linear  spring.    This  model  was  chosen  for  its 
simplicity  and  it  appears  to  capture  the  features  of  the  resulting 
Force vs Position plot well (Figure 4). The slope of  the  line  is  the 
stiffness value used for that individual palpation.   

3.2 

Learning Algorithms  

Driving  the  learning  behind  the  various  learning  methods 
described  in  this  section  are  three  different  learning  algorithms, 
Logistic  Regression  (LR),  Gaussian  Discriminate  Analysis 
(GDA),  and  a  Support  Vector  Machine  (SVM).  The  convex 
optimizer  used  to  solve  the  SVM with  regularization   equations  is 
a  MATLAB  toolkit  developed  by  Michael  Grant  and  Stephen 
Boyd  called  CVX  [3].  The  SVM  regularization  weighting 
parameter ‘C’ was tuned by hand. 

3.3 

Supervised Learning Training Set 

The  training  set  used  for  all  the  learning  algorithms  is pictured  in 
Figure 5.  The  data  in  this  set was  found  to  have  the  least  training 
set error among all the data sets  acquired. Note  that in Figure 5, a 
data  point  is  stiffer  if  its  color  is  more  towa rds  the  red  color 
spectrum of the scale, while softer points are depicted towards the 
blue color spectrum. The three test sets are seen in Figure 6. 

3.4 

Stiffness  Learning  followed  by  Radius  of  Tumor 
Learning 

The  first  method  used  the  training  set  to  develop  a  threshold  for  
labeling  a  point  as  in  the  tumorous  region  or  not  in  the  tumorous 
region  based  on  the  observed  stiffness  value.  The  resulting 
threshold would  take a data point in  the  test set and conclude  that 

 
2 
(a) 
(c) 
                 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: Test sets used. Note, the black circle, depicting the shape of the tumor, is what we seek to estimate, however they’re drawn here for 
convenience. Note that none of these sets share the same orientation. 

      

 

 
Figure  7:  Example  of  1-dimensional  threshold  fitting.  The 
threshold is the black  line.  For  the  test sets, all datapoints right of 
this line would be  labeled as tumorous and all points to  the left as 
non-tumorous. 
 
if its stiffness was greater than the threshold, it would be classified 
as  belonging  to  the  tumor.  Otherwise,  the  point  would  be 
classified  as  not  belonging  to  the  tumor.  See  Figure  7  for  an 
example of this 1-Dimensional thresholding. 
   The  threshold  was  learned  using  the  three  different  learning 
algorithms  covered  in  Section  3.2:  Logistic Regression, Gaussian 
Discriminate  Analysis,  and  a  Support  Vector  Machine.  Once  the 
palpation  data  was  labeled  given  the  learned  stiffness  threshold, 
the  supposed  center  of  the  tumor was  calculated   as  a mean  of  all 
the  points  classified  as   a  tumor.  This  concluded  the  first  learning 
portion  of  the  first  method  and  estimated  the  center  of  the  tumor; 
however  another  learning  iteration  was  performed  to  determine 
the size of the tumor. 
   Towards this end, the palpation data was then concatenated with 
a  new  feature:  the distance  of  the  palpation  point  to  the supposed 
center  of  the  tumor.   The  same  three  learning  algorithms  were 
again utilized to threshold the likely radius of the tumor given our 
(relabeled)  dataset.  The  data would  again be  labeled  according  to 
this new threshold. 

3.4.1 

Labeling the Test Set 

When  implementing  this  first  method  on  a  test  set,  the  stiffness 
threshold would  be  used against  the  test  data  to  provide an  initial 
labeling  of  the  data  points.   The mean  of  the data  points  classified 
as  a  tumor  served  to  estimate  the  center  of  the  tumor.  After  this 
initial  labeling,  LR,  GDA,  and  SVMs  were  trained  to  learn  the 
most likely radius of the tumor, and the points were then relabeled 
according  to  this  threshold.   In  this method,  the stiffness  threshold 
was  learned  from  the  training  set,  while  the  distance  from  center 
of tumor threshold was learned and applied on the test data itself. 

3.5  Weighted  Clusters  followed  by  Radius  of  Tumor 
Learning 

The  second  method  first  estimated  the  center  of  the  centroid 
according to the weighted centroid calculation in Equation 1: 
 

 

 

(Equation 1) 

 
   The  parameters  {10,3}  seen  in  Equation  1  were  tuned  by  hand 
and  found  to  give  acceptable  performance  on  the  training  set 
exhibited  by  the  estimated  tumor  center  being within  2mm  of  the 
actual center of the tumor.  
   Once  the  center  of  the  centroid  was  calculated,  the  palpation 
data  was  concatenated  with  the  distance  of  each  palpation  from 

 
Figure  8:  Example  of  a  2-dimensional  threshold  fitting.  The 
threshold  is  the  blue  line, which  the  support  vector margins  are 
in green and red. 

the supposed center of the tumor in the same way as in the method 
detailed  in  Section  3.4.  This  concatenated  data  and  the  labeling 
provided  by  the  training  set  were  used  to  create a  threshold  using 
LR, GDA,  and  a  SVM.  This  threshold estimates  the  radius  of  the 
tumor.  
   It is important to know that because this threshold is constructed 
form the training set, it can only predict tumors of the same size as 
the training set. 

3.5.1 

Labeling the Test Set 

The estimated center of the tumor was first calculated by Equation 
1.Then,  each  palpation’s  data  was  concatenated  with  its  distance 
from  the  estimated  center.  Finally,  the  points  were  labeled 
according to the thresholds developed in training.  

3.6  Weighted  Clusters  followed  by  Radius  of  Tumor 
vs. Stiffness Learning 

This method  estimated  the center of  the tumor using  the weighted 
centroid calculation in Equation 1. After the center was calculated 
and  the  palpation  data  was  concatenated  with  the  distance  from 
the estimated center of  the  tumor, a 2-Dimsional plot was created 
using the data, with one axis being the distance from the estimated 
center  of  the  tumor,  and  the  other  axis  being  the  approximate 
stiffness observed from the palpation.  LR, GDA, and a SVM were 
again  utilized  to  develop  thresholds  in  this  2-D  space.  Figure  8 
shows the threshold for the training set generated by  the SVM. 

3.6.1 

Labeling the Test Set 

The weighted  centroid  center  location was  first  calculated  for  the 
test set, followed by  classifying the points based on the  thresholds 
derived in the training phase.  

3.7 

K-Means Clustering  

Shifting  away  from  supervised  learning  algorithms,  this  next 
method  of  classification  first  calculated  the  weighted  centroid 
center  location  using  Equation  1,  and  generated  the  same  2-
dimensional  plot  used  in  Section  3.6.   This  method  would  then 
implement  k-means  clustering,  labeling  two  clusters  to  segment 
the  data.  The  two  clusters  would  classify  points  as  “tumor”  and 
“not tumor”. 

 

3 

 
Figure  9:  Results  from  a  single  trial  of  the  method  detailed  in 
Section  3.4  using  a  SVM  for  thresholding.  The  estimated  tumor 
is shown in magenta, the actual tumor is shown in black.  

3.8 

K-Means  Clustering  and  Radius  of  Tumor  vs. 
Stiffness Learning  

This method  I’d  like  to  refer  to as “semi -supervised”, as it has  the 
notion  of  a  training  set  but  derives  thresholds  from  this  “training 
set”  based  on  an  unsupervised  labeling  of  the  data.  Following  the 
same  exact  procedure  as  in  3.7  all  the  way  through  labeling  the 
two point classes, the set of data arbitrarily chosen as the “training 
set”  would  be  used  to  develop  thresholds  using  LR,  GDA,  and  a 
SVM  in a similar  fashion  to  the method explained  in  Section  3.6. 
Recall the “training set” didn’t come with a ground-truth labeling, 
instead  the  threshold  is  developed  from  the  K-means  clusters 
labeling of the data. 

3.8.1 

Labeling the Test Set 

Similar to the initialization of labeling the test set in Section 3.5,  a 
2-D  plot  was  created  with  distance  from  the  center  of  the 
supposed tumor on one axis and stiffness on another. Then, using 
the thresholds generated form the “semi -training set”, the data was 
classified as part of the tumor or not part of the tumor . 

 

 
Figure  10:  Results  indicating  the  number  of  false  positives  plus 
false negatives against learning methodology, learning algorithm  
(a)  Stiffness Learning followed by Radius of Tumor Learning 
(Note  since  this method  labelled  the  test  set  points  twice,  I 
included errors from both relabelings).  
(b)  Weighted Clusters followed by Radius of Tumor Learning 
(c)  Weighted  Clusters  followed  by  Radius  of  Tumor  vs. 
Stiffness Learning 
(d)  K-Means Clustering 
(e)  K-Means  Clustering  and  Radius  of  Tumor  vs.  Stiffness 
Learning 

5 

DISCUSSION  

5.1 

Number of False Negatives Plus Number of False 
Positives 

Referring  to  Figure  10,  it  appears  that  all  the  learning  methods 
presented  in  Section  3  perform  reasonably  well,  although  the 
supervised  learning  methods  did  outperform  the  unsupervised 
learning  methods.  GDA  tended  to  be  more  conservative  then  LR 
or  a  SVM  and  chose  less  aggressive  thresholds . We  can see  for  3 
of the 4 methods that compared the performance of LR, GDA, and 
a  SVM  this  conservatism  resulted  in  lower  average  errors  overall  
(Figure 10a, 10c, 10e). 

4 

RESULTS 

5.2 

Location of Tumor 

4.1 

Tumor/Not Tumor Labeling 

The  three  test  sets  averaged  76  different  palpations  apiece.  The 
training set has 81 different palpations. 
Figure  9  shows  the  result  of  one  iteration  of  one  learning 
method graphically. In particular, this analysis was done using the 
method detailed  in  section 3.4 and used a SVM  to generate all  the 
threshold values. 
   Figure  10  displays  the  number  of  false  positives  plus  false 
negatives for all methods across all learning algorithms.   

4.2 

Specific Size and Location Data 

The  method  described  in  Section  3.4  estimated  the  center  of  the 
supposed  tumor  to  be  approximately  1cm  away  from  the   actual 
location. 
   The  methods  described  in  Sections  3.5-3.8  all  use  a  weighted 
centroid  to  approximate  the  center  of  the  supposed  tumor  using 
Equation  1.  The  average  error  between  the  actual  and  estimated 
center  of  the  tumor  was  8.7891mm.  All  the  learning  methods 
appeared  to  predict  the  approximate  radius  of  the  tumor  within 
1cm.  

 

All  the  methods  suffered  a  large  error  with  respect  to  predicting 
the  center  of  tumor.  This  is  due  to  two  reasons.  Firstly,  the 
palpation  data  wasn’t  controlled  to  a  specific  resolution,  so  the 
palpation  locations weren’t  uniformly  distributed  about  the  tumor 
(useful  for  weighted  centroid  estimates)  and  not  uniformly 
distributed within the tumor itself (useful for all methods).  
   Secondly,  the  method  by  which  the  force  data  was  acquired  is 
too dependent on the configuration of the Phantom robot and isn’t 
uniform over  the workspace of  the robot.   In particular,  I was only 
reading  the  force  data  read  from  the  sensor  along  one  axis, 
regardless of the orientation of the force sensor with respect to the 
artificial  tissue.  Towards  the  edges  of  the  Phantom’s  workspace, 
the  force  sensor  is  tilted,  and  the  force  read  by  this  tilted  sensor 
generated  from  a  palpation  normal  to  the  surface  of  the  artificial 
tissue  will  not  generate  forces  solely  in  the   z-axis  relative  to  the 
force-torque sensor. 

5.3 

Robustness 

While all the methods did reasonably well at labeling the points in 
the testing sets, a major  flaw in most of  the  learning methods was 
that  they  are  specifically  trained  to  identify  a  tumor  of  the  same 
size as the testing set, and  are furthermore restricted to identifying 
only one tumor per test set. 

4 

REFERENCES 

[1]  G.  Guthart  and  J.  Salsibury,  J.K.  The  Intuitive  TM  Telesurgery 
System:  Overview  and  Application. 
In 
IEEE 
International 
Conference and Robotics and Automation, Pages 618-621,2000 
[2]  Gwilliam,  James  C .,  Zachary  Pezzementi,  Er ica  Jantho,  Allison  M. 
Okamua,  and  Steven  Hsiao.  "Human  vs.  Robotic  Tactile  Sensing: 
Detecting  Lumps  in  Soft  Tissue." Haptics  Symposium (2010). IEEE 
Xplore. Web. 12 Dec. 2011. 
[3]  Grant,  Michael,  and  Stephen  Boyd. CVX.  Computer  software. CVX:  
MATLAB  Software  for  D isciplined  Convex  Programming .  Vers. 
1.21. Web. 11 Dec. 2011. <http://cvxr.com/cvx/>.  
[4]  S.  B.  Williams,  M.  H.  Chen,  A.  V.  D 'Amico,  A.  C.  Weinberg,  R. 
Kacker , M.  S.  Hirsch,  J.  P.  Richie,  and  J.  C.  Hu.  Radical  retropubic 
prostatectomy  and  robotic-a ssisted 
laparoscopic  prostatectomy: 
likelihood  of  positive  surgical  margin(s).  Urology,  2010  Mar  17. 
[Epub ahead of print]  
[5]  Yamamoto,  Tomonori.  “Applying  Tissue  Models  in  Teleoperated 
Robot-Assisted Surgery” Diss. Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, 
2011. Dissertations and Theses. Web.   

 

 

   The  first  method,  however,  differs  from  the  others  in  the  sense 
that  it  thresholds  first  on  solely  the  stiffness  information, 
regardless  of  how many  tumors  are  present  or  the  size  of  tumors. 
However,  the  second  round  of  thresholding  based  on  the  distance 
from  the  estimated  center  of  the  tumor  assumes  one  tumor 
present.  Despite  this,  the  increased  flexibility  of  the  first  method 
with  respect  to  size  of  the  tumor  makes  it  superior  to  the  other 
methods  explored  in  this  paper   in  light  of  this  method  exhibiting 
no greater error than the other methods presented . 

6 

FUTURE WORK  

6.1 

Hardware 

The “artificial  tissue” used was a sponge, not a phantom  tissue as 
is  desired  for  palpation  experiments.  Once  a  phantom  tissue  is 
created, more accurate stiffness data can be attained.   

6.2 

Data Collection 

There are two major areas of improvement for data collection, and 
one minor.  Firstly, with  an  off-the-shelf  path  planning  algorithm, 
the  Phantom  Premium  should  be  able  to  palpate  the  artificial 
tissue  autonomously.  Secondly,  addressing 
the  workspace 
constraints  of  the  Phantom  Premium  a  more  clever  way  of 
gathering  the  force  data  for  palpations  taken  at  the  edges  of  the 
Phantom  Premium’s  workspace  needs  to  be  utilized.  This  would 
involve  reading  the  forces  on  all  three  axis  of  the  force -torque 
sensor and given knowledge about the configuration of  the sensor 
relative  to  the  artificial  tissue   from  the  Phantom  Premium’s 
encoders,  transform  these  forces  into  the same  Cartesian  space  as 
the  artificial  tissue,  and  record  the  force  vector  normal  to  the 
surface  of  the  tissue.  Additionally,  using  a  non-linear  model  for 
tissue stiffness has shown to estimate data taken during palpations 
of  phantom  tissues  more  accurately  than  the   linear  model 
presented [5]. 

6.3 

Learning Algorithms 

Ideally,  with  the  autonomous  palpation  goal  mentioned  in  the 
hardware  section  of  future  work,  the  learning  would  happen  in 
real-time such  that as  the Phantom  Premium palpates the artificial 
tissue  sample,  it  can  learn  where  the  tumor  is  likely  located  and 
then  gather  new  data  near  the  thresholds  of  its  50%  confidence 
region to generate more accurate predictions. 

7 

CONCLUSIONS 

In summary,  I’ve shown  that with  the data gathered  from a  force -
torque  sensor  and  a  robotic  device,  learning  algorithms  can  be 
used  to  estimate  the  size  and  location  of  a  tumor -like  object 
embedded into an artificial  tissue.  Five different learning methods 
were  explored,  three  with  supervised  learning  and  two  with 
unsupervised  learning.  Although  all  methods  gave  comparable 
results,  the  first  method  proposed,  one  that  relabels  the  test  set 
based  on  a  stiffness  threshold  learned  from  the  training  set,  and 
then with  this  new  labeling  develops a  threshold  for  the  radius  of 
the  is  the  most  robust  algorithm,  and  will  be  utilized  in  future 
works.  This  work  will  be  extended  to  include  autonomous 
palpation and real-time learning algorithms. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I’d  like  to  thank  Allison  Okamura  for  her  advice  throughout  this 
project and trusting me to setup the hardware. 

 

5 

