Stock Prediction Using Twitter Sentiment Analysis

Anshul Mittal
Stanford University
anmittal@stanford.edu

Arpit Goel
Stanford University
argoel@stanford.edu

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we apply sentiment analysis and machine
learning principles to ﬁnd the correlation between ”public
sentiment” and ”market sentiment”. We use twitter data to
predict public mood and use the predicted mood and pre-
vious days’ DJIA values to predict the stock market move-
ments. In order to test our results, we propose a new cross
validation method for ﬁnancial data and obtain 75.56% accu-
racy using Self Organizing Fuzzy Neural Networks (SOFNN)
on the Twitter feeds and DJIA values from the period June
2009 to December 2009. We also implement a naive protfo-
lio management strategy based on our predicted values. Our
work is based on Bollen et al’s famous paper which predicted
the same with 87% accuracy.

INTRODUCTION
1.
Stock market prediction has been an active area of research
for a long time. The Eﬃcient Market Hypothesis (EMH)
states that stock market prices are largely driven by new
information and follow a random walk pattern. Though this
hypothesis is widely accepted by the research community as
a central paradigm governing the markets in general, several
people have attempted to extract patterns in the way stock
markets behave and respond to external stimuli.

In this paper, we test a hypothesis based on the premise
of behavioral economics, that the emotions and moods of
individuals aﬀect their decison making process, thus, lead-
ing to a direct correlation between ”public sentiment” and
”market sentiment”. We perform sentiment analysis on pub-
licly available Twitter data to ﬁnd the public mood and the
degree of membership into 4 classes - Calm, Happy, Alert
and Kind (somewhat like fuzzy membership). We use these
moods and previous days’ Dow Jones Industrial Average
(DJIA) values to predict future stock movements and then
use the predicted values in our portfolio management strat-
egy.

Related work Our work is based on Bollen et al’s strat-
egy [1] which received widespread media coverage recently.
They also attempted to predict the behavior of the stock
market by measuring the mood of people on Twitter. The
authors considered the tweet data of all twitter users in 2008
and used the OpinionFinder and Google Proﬁle of Mood
States (GPOMS) algorithm to classify public sentiment into
6 categories, namely, Calm, Alert, Sure, Vital, Kind and
Happy. They cross validated the resulting mood time series
by comparing its ability to detect the public’s response to the

presidential elections and Thanksgiving day in 2008. They
also used causality analysis to investigate the hypothesis
that public mood states, as measured by the OpinionFinder
and GPOMS mood time series, are predictive of changes
in DJIA closing values. The authors used Self Organizing
Fuzzy Neural Networks to predict DJIA values using pre-
vious values. Their results show a remarkable accuracy of
nearly 87% in predicting the up and down changes in the
closing values of Dow Jones Industrial Index (DJIA).

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The second sec-
tion brieﬂy discusses our general approach towards solving
the problem and the following sections discuss the individ-
ual components in greater detail. In Section 3, we brieﬂy
discuss the dataset that we have used for this paper and
data preprocessing measures adopted. Section 4 discusses
the sentiment analysis technique developed by us for the
purpose of this paper. Section 5 includes in detail, the dif-
ferent machine learning techniques to predict DJIA values
using our sentiment analysis results and presents our ﬁnd-
ings. In Section 6, we use the predicted values and devise a
naive strategy to maintain a proﬁtable portfolio.

2. ALGORITHM
The technique used in this paper builds directly on the one
used by Bollen et al. [1]. The raw DJIA values are ﬁrst fed
into the preprocessor to obtain the processed values. At the
same time, the tweets are fed to the sentiment analysis algo-
rithm which outputs mood values for the four mood classes
for each day. These moods and the processed DJIA values
are then fed to our model learning framework which uses
SOFNN to learn a model to predict future DJIA values us-
ing them. The learnt model as well as the previous DJIA and
mood values are used by the portfolio management system
which runs the model to predict the future value and uses
the predicted values to make appropriate buy/sell decisions.
Figure 1 shows a brief ﬂow diagram of our technique.

The following sections discuss each component of our tech-
nique in greater detai

3. DATASET
In this pro ject, we used two main datasets-

• Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) values from June
2009 to December 2009. The data was obtained using
Yahoo! Finance and includes the open, close, high and
low values for a given day.

1

very diﬃcult to predict. We pruned our dataset by
removing these periods for ﬁnal training and testing.

Finally, in order to ensure that values were small and com-
parable, we computed the z-score of each point in the data
series ((x − µ)/σ) and used that in our analysis (The original
values were of the order of 104 , so MATLAB was giving a
precision error when computing functions like exp(−x2 ))

4. SENTIMENT ANALYSIS
Sentiment analysis was an important part of our solution
since the output of this module was used for learning our
predictive model. While there has been a lot of research go-
ing on in classifying a piece of text as either positive or nega-
tive, there has been little work on multi-class classiﬁcation.
In this pro ject, we use four mood classes, namely, Calm,
Happy, Alert, and Kind. We tried several standard tools
like OpinionFinder, SentiWordnet [5] etc.
for our problem
but found them inadequate and/or ineﬃcient and therefore
decided to develop our own analysis code. The methodology
we adopted in ﬁnding the public sentiment is as follows-

1. Word List Generation
We develop our own word list based on the well known
Proﬁle of Mood States (POMS) questionnaire. POMS
is an established psychometric questionnaire which asks
a person to rate his/her current mood by answering 65
diﬀerent questions on a scale of 1 to 5 (For example,
rate on a scale of 1 to 5 how tensed you feel today?).
These 65 words are then mapped on to 6 standard
POMS moods- Tension, Depression, Anger, Vigour,
Fatigue and Confusion. In order to do automate this
analysis for tweets, the word list needs to be appro-
priately extended. Bollen et al. [1] used the Google
n-grams data for the same. We followed a much sim-
pler approach of extending the list by considering all
commonly occuring synonyms of the base 65 words us-
ing SentiWordNet and a standard Thesaurus.

2. Tweet Filtering
As mentioned earlier, the tweet data is enormous and
will take several hours to be processed if used as it
is (which makes the task of daily predictions diﬃcult).
Therefore, we ﬁltered and considered only those tweets
which are more likely to express a feeling, i.e. we con-
sider only those tweets which contain the words ”feel”,
”makes me”, ”I’m” or ”I am” in them.

3. Daily Score Computation
We used a simple word counting algorithm to ﬁnd the
score for every POMS word for a given day-

score of a word = #of times the word matches tweets in a day
#of total matches of all words

The denominator accounts for the fact that the num-
ber of tweets could vary from one day to another. This
works well for our problem because of the nature of
tweets which contain simple sentence structures and
only a maximum of 140 characters (in most cases much
less). We tried using the Stanford coreNLP software
for word tagging and then using a word’s position in

Figure 1: Our technique

• Publicly available Twitter data containing more than
476 million tweets corresponding to more than 17 mil-
lion users from June 2009 to December 2009. The data
includes the timestamp, username and tweet text for
every tweet during that period. Since we perform our
prediction and analysis on a daily basis, we split the
tweets by days using the timestamp information.

Data Preprocessing
The data obtained from the above mentioned sources had
to be pre-processed to make it suitable for reliable analysis.
We pre-processed the DJIA data in the following manner-

1. While the Twitter data was available for all days ly-
ing in the giving period, the DJIA values obtained
using Yahoo! Finance was (understandably) absent
for weekends and other holidays when the market is
closed.
In order to complete this data, we approxi-
mated the missing values using a concave function. So,
if the DJIA value on a given day is x and the next avail-
able data point is y with n days missing in between, we
approximate the missing data by estimating the ﬁrst
day after x to be (y + x)/2 and then following the same
method recursively till all gaps are ﬁlled. This approx-
imation is justiﬁed as the stock data usually follows a
concave function, unless ofcourse at anomaly points of
sudden rise and fall.

2. If we observe the general movement of stock markets,
it is associated with a few sudden jumps/falls and a
brief period of small ﬂuctuations around the new value.
However, such jumps/falls are due to some ma jor aber-
rations and cannot be predicted. Moreover, as we
know the public memory is very short and even though
the market may be trading at a much higher level than
the previous year, that does not mean that calmness
will be much higher than previous year; public mood is
a very local metric. Therefore, we adjusted our stock
values by shifting up/down for steep falls/jumps, re-
spectively; making sure that we do not disturb the
daily directional trend (up/down movement of stock
prices).

3. Even after shifting the values in step 2, the values con-
tained signiﬁcant periods of volatile activity which are

2

the sentence to ﬁnd its importance. However, similar
to our experience working with OpinionFinder, we ob-
served that this process, besides being extremely slow
was not too beneﬁcial.

4. Score Mapping
We map the score of each word to the six standard
POMS states using the mapping techniques speciﬁed
in the POMS questionnaire. We then map the POMS
states to our four mood states using static correlation
rules (for example, happy is taken as sum of vigour
and negation of depression).

It is important to note that, given our formulation, it does
not make much sense to compare the value of one mood
against another; they should only be used to compare mood
trends across days. We cross validated the results of our sen-
timent analysis technique by comparing the values returned
by our algorithm around signiﬁcant events like Thanksgiv-
ing day and Michael Jackson’s death. As shown in Figure
2, the moods show a sharp rise of various mood states on
Thanksgiving whereas one day after MJ’s death, there is a
sharp decline in happiness.

about another over a given lag period. The p-value mea-
sures the statistical signiﬁcance of our result i.e. how likely
we could obtain the causality value by random chance; there-
fore, lower the p-value, higher the predictive ability.
It is
clear from Table 1 that calmness and happiness are most
helpful in predicting the DJIA values as per the Granger
causality. Moreover, the causality is best when we use the
past 3 or 4 days’ data. Figure 3 shows the DJIA values su-
perimposed with sum of calmness and happiness over a brief
period, indicating the clear predictive trend.

Table 1: p-values obtained using Granger causality
analysis with diﬀerent lags (in days)
Lag Calm Happy Alert Kind
0.0775
0.0345
0.4501
0.0207
1
2
0.0336
0.1849
0.1063
0.1038
0.1123
0.1679
0.0658
0.0106
3
0.1810
0.3257
0.0682
0.0069
4
5
0.0100
0.0798
0.1151
0.1157

(a) Various moods after Michael Jackson’s death on 25
June 2009

(b) Various moods on Thanksgiving day on 26 November
2009

Figure 2: Cross validation of our sentiment analysis
by analyzing moods on some important events

Granger Causality In order to ascertain whether the mood
values returned by our algorithm can be used to predict
the future stock movements, we computed the p-values us-
ing Granger Causality analysis. Granger Causality analy-
sis ﬁnds how much predictive information one signal has

3

Figure 3: The DJIA, and Calmness + Happiness
curves superimposed to show correlation

In the next section, we use the results of our sentiment anal-
ysis algorithm to learn a model that can predict the stock
index and its movement.

5. MODEL LEARNING AND PREDICTION
Granger causality is based on linear regression, but the cor-
relation between stocks and moods is certainly non linear.
Therefore, after ﬁnding a causality relation between the past
3 days moods and current day stock prices, we tried 4 dif-
ferent learning algorithms (Linear Regression, Logistic Re-
gression, SVMs, Self Organizing Fuzzy Neural Networks) to
learn and study the actual correlation. For SVM we used
the LIBSVM [2] library, but we implemented the other three
in MATLAB ourselves as we could not ﬁnd good working
libraries for them. The Self Organizing Fuzzy Neural Net-
work (SOFNN) is a ﬁve layer fuzzy neural network which
uses ellipsoidal basis function (EBF) neurons consisting of
a center vector and a width vector. We implemented the
online alorithm for creating SOFNNs as introduced in [3] in
which neurons are added or pruned from the existing net-
work as new samples arrive. Neural networks have been
considered to be a very eﬀective learning algorithm for de-
coding nonlinear time series data [4], and ﬁnancial markets
often follow nonlinear trends. The authors in [1] showed the

Linear Regression

Table 2: DJIA 5-SCV Accuracy Using 4 Diﬀerent Algorithms
Evaluation
ID
ICD
ICHD
ICAD
ICKD
ICHAD ICHKD
7.78%
7.28% 7.26% 7.66% 7.05% 7.43% 7.57%
MAPE
64.44% 64.44% 71.11% 64.44% 64.44% 68.89% 71.11%
Direction
Logistic Regression Direction
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
60%
59.75% 59.75% 59.75% 59.75% 59.75% 59.75% 59.75%
Direction
SVM
MAPE
9.71% 9.66% 11.03% 9.22%
11%
10.52% 11.78%
64.44% 71.11% 75.56% 68.89% 73.33% 73.33% 73.33%
Direction

Algorithm

SOFNN

87% correlation using SOFNNs only, and our results also in-
dicate that SOFFNs do the best among all other algorithms,
giving nearly 75.56% accuracy.

In order to measure accuracy, we developed a novel valida-
tion technique called the k-fold sequential cross validation
(k-SCV). In this method, we train on all days upto a spe-
ciﬁc day and test for the next k days. The direct k-fold
cross validation method is not applicable in this context as
the stock data is actually a time series unlike other scenarios
where the data is available as a set. Therefore, it is mean-
ingless to analyze past stock data after training on future
values. For the purpose of our analysis, we use k = 5.

Our Granger Causality analysis indicates that Calm and
Happy are causative of the DJIA values. But to conﬁrm the
inverse dependence of other mood dimensions on DJIA we
investigated a total of 7 diﬀerent possibilities. In Table 2, ID
denotes the 5-SCV accuracy when only the past 3 days DJIA
values are given as features. Similarly ICD , ICHD , ICAD ,
ICKD , ICHKD , ICHAD denote the accuracy when features
are the past 3 days DJIA values (represented by D) along
with the past 3 days mood values (C=Calm, H=Happy,
A=Alert, K=Kind) in diﬀerent combinations. MAPE indi-
cates the Mean Absolute Percentage Error between our pre-
dicted values and the actual normalized stock values. The
Direction accuracy indicates the percentage matchings in
the trends (up/down) predicted by our training vs the ac-
tual daily trends in the stocks. When using classiﬁcation
algorithms, we used the up/down trends as class inputs and
used the algorithm to directly predict trends whereas when
using regression algorithms, we fed the normalized stock val-
ues as input and used the predicted stock values to obtain
direction (up/down) trends.

We ﬁnd that ICHD gives the best results in all the algo-
rithms considered, indicating that Calmness and Happiness
are more predictive of the stock values, conﬁrming the Granger
causality analysis and unlike the [1] result. They showed
87% correlation when features were Calm and DJIA values of
past 3 days, and reported the accuracy only on a speciﬁc test
set, without reporting any cross validation error average.
Our results are also in conjunction with the philosophy that
happiness should in general be causative of the stock values.
Figure 4 shows a graph of the normalized stock values as
predicted by our SOFNN algorithm vs the actual normal-
ized stock values when trained on the Happy+Calm+DJIA
feature set. We ﬁnd a very close correlation and hence the
small value of Mean Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE) and
good Directional Accuracy.

We can draw several important conclusions from the Table

Figure 4: Predicted vs Actual Stock Values using
SOFNN on Calm+Happy+DJIA for 40 Consecutive
Days

2. Firstly SVMs and Logistic Regression perform badly on
this dataset, giving the same percentage values for Direction
Accuracy for all mood combinations. This shows that classi-
ﬁcation (directly predicting trends) is not the ideal method-
ology for this problem. Linear Regression performs pretty
good, which is in conjunction with the Granger Causality re-
sults, whereas SOFNN performs the best. If we look at the
Direction Accuracy for SOFNN we observe that the best
value is for ICHD (75.56%). Also on adding any other mood
dimension the Direction Accuracy worsens, ie. the Direction
Accuracy is clearly lower for ICHAD , ICHKD . This shows
that by adding more features we would essentially be overﬁt-
ting the data. If we try to remove some feature and ﬁnd the
Direction Accuracy, we observe that the result still worsens.
Hence Calm and Happiness are indeed more indicative of
the stock values than any other moods. If we consider the
MAPE values, we ﬁnd that Calm and Alert mood dimen-
sions do marginally better than the others, but they are poor
in predicting the Direction or the trends of stock movement.

To compare the signiﬁcance of our results on the Directional
Accuracy with those of
[1], we see that 5 fold sequential
cross validation is clearly a better indicator.
[1] have used
a speciﬁc test period which gives a 87.6% Directional Accu-
racy, and they have proved that statistically the probability
of that event happening with random success is pretty low.

4

But we have on the other hand cross validated over the entire
period, using our 5-fold SCV technique. As mentioned ear-
lier, this technique makes more sense for stock data because
the usual cross validation would essentially be using future
stock values to predict the past ones, which is an incorrect
technique when ﬁnancial data is concerned.

6. PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT
Having predicted the DJIA closing values one day in ad-
vance, we can use these predicted values to make intelligent
sell/buy decisions. We develop a naive greedy strategy based
on a simple assumption that we can hold at most one stock
at any given time (or s stocks if all stocks are always bought
and sold together) Following are the steps/features of our
strategy-

• Pre-computation
We maintain a running average and standard deviation
of actual adjusted stock values of previous k days

• Buy Decision
If the predicted stock value for the next day is n stan-
dard deviations less than the mean, we buy the stock
else we wait.

• Sell Decision
If the predicted stock value is m standard deviations
more than the actual adjusted value at buy time, we
sell the stock else we hold.

Note that the above strategy has three parameters- k , n and
m. Our experiments show that the optimal parametrization
is n = m = 1 and k = 7 or 15 (Note that in order to trade
eﬀectively, we needed a large enough test set, containing at
least 30-40 entries, thereby limiting the scope of our exper-
iments because of limited test data.) The proﬁt obtained
using our strategy is as follows-

k = 7 - P rof it = 527.2 Dow Points
k = 15 - P rof it = 543.65 Dow Points

The total range of stock movement in the same period is
920.72 Dow Points.

Please note that while the above analysis is entirely in terms
of Dow points, it is easy to correlate a proﬁt in Dow points
with a monetary value. For example, the Dow Diamonds
is an exchange-traded fund that holds the 30 stocks that
comprise the DJIA and researchers have shown a 98.5% cor-
relation between the movement of DJIA and the Dow Dia-
monds. Similarly, we can ﬁnd many other funds which can
translate this proﬁt in Down point to a corresponding proﬁt
in Dollars.

7. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have investigated the causative relation between public
mood as measured from a large scale collection of tweets
from twitter.com and the DJIA values. Our results show
that ﬁrstly public mood can indeed be captured from the
large-scale Twitter feeds by means of simple natural lan-
guage processing techniques, as indicated by the responses

5

towards a variety of socio-cultural events during the year
2009. Secondly, among the observed dimensions of moods,
only calmness and happiness are Granger causative of the
DJIA by 3-4 days. Thirdly, a Self Organizing Fuzzy Neural
Network performs very good in predicting the actual DJIA
values when trained on the feature set consisting of the DJIA
values, Calm mood values and Happiness dimension over the
past 3 days. The performance measure we have used is k-
fold sequential cross validation, which is more indicative of
the market movements for ﬁnancial data. Finally a naive
implementation of portfolio management using our strategy
indicates a decent proﬁt over a range of 40 days.

Our results are in some conjunction with [1], but there are
some ma jor diﬀerences as well. Firstly our results show a
better correlation between the calm and happy mood dimen-
sions with the DJIA values, unlike their result, which showed
high correlation with only calm mood dimension. Secondly,
we haven’t been able to obtain high percentage result of
87%, but our 75.56% result using k-fold sequential cross val-
idation gives stronger evidence that the correlation is over
the entire range of data. The proﬁts in out naive imple-
mentation of portfolio management shows that our MAPE
estimates are pretty much accurate.

Finally, its worth mentioning that our analysis doesn’t take
into account many factors. Firstly, our dataset doesn’t really
map the real public sentiment, it only considers the twit-
ter using, english speaking people.
It’s possible to obtain
a higher correlation if the actual mood is studied. It may
be hypothesized that people’s mood indeed aﬀect their in-
vestment decisions, hence the correlation. But in that case,
there’s no direct correlation between the people who invest
in stocks and who use twitter more frequently, though there
certainly is an indirect correlation - investment decisions of
people may be aﬀected by the moods of people around them,
ie. the general public sentiment. All these remain as areas
of future research.

8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are extremely grateful to Mihai Surdeanu and John Bauer
for introducing us to this problem and also for their constant
guidance and support.

9. REFERENCES
[1] J. Bollen and H. Mao. Twitter mood as a stock market
predictor. IEEE Computer, 44(10):91–94.
[2] C.-C. Chang and C.-J. Lin. LIBSVM: A library for
support vector machines. ACM Transactions on
Intel ligent Systems and Technology, 2:27:1–27:27, 2011.
[3] G. P. Gang Leng and T. M. McGinnity. An on-line
algorithm for creating self-organizing fuzzy neural
networks. Neural Networks, 17(10):1477–1493.
[4] A. Lapedes and R. Farber. Nonlinear signal processing
using neural network: Prediction and system modeling.
In Los Alamos National Lab Technical Report.
[5] A. E. Stefano Baccianella and F. Sebastiani.
Sentiwordnet 3.0: An enhanced lexical resource for
sentiment analysis and opinion mining. In LREC.
LREC.

