HESSIAN FREE OPTIMIZATION METHODS FOR MACHINE LEARNING

PROBLEMS

AJ FRIEND, ED SCHMERLING, AKSHAY MITTAL

CS229 Class Project

Abstract. In this article, we describe the algorithm and study the performance of a Hessian free opti-
mization technique applied to machine learning problems. We implement the commonly used black box
model for optimization and solve a particular challenging recursive neural network learning problem, which
exhibits a non-convex and non-dierentiable function output. In order to adapt the method to machine
learning ob jective functions, we explore a few modications to the optimization routine such as damping,
mini-batching, modifying termination criteria, etc. The convergence properties are compared against the
quasi-Newton L-BFGS method.

Introduction

In most cases, machine learning models essentially solve a single or series of optimization (minimization)
steps to nd the optimum set of parameters and quantities of interest. The focus of this pro ject is on an
ecient iterative routine to use in these optimization steps. The occurrence of large training sets and number
of parameters is common in machine learning models, as seen in learning problems such at those described
in [1], where recursive neural networks are implemented. The following sections describe a popular Hessian
free algorithm [2], which was implemented and tested for a complex Recursive Autoencoder model. We
model the ob jective as an unconditional black box, that is, we only get information about the function value
and the gradient (or subgradient) at each iteration step. We also describe the modications done to the
standard Hessian free algorithm to adapt it to machine learning problems, which can exhibit non-smooth
and non-convex response behavior, in order to ensure the good convergence properties of the Newton-like
steps.

Hessian-Free Optimization

Black Box Model. Our aim is to provide an optimization framework that is applicable to a wide range
of problems. In most machine learning problems however, we often run into large data sets and complex
code steps to evaluate the ob jective function and gradient, and it is often impractical to develop intrusive
optimization models for these problems. Therefore, the framework we will use requires minimal information
about the ob jective function, i.e. we only require the function value and a derivative at any query point.
Thus, we have an unconditional oracle that takes as input a vector x and outputs the function value f and
g (x) = ∇f (x) (or subgradient).

Hessian-Free Minimization. We implement the Hessian-free optimization method advanced by Martens
in [2]. We are interested in designing a Newton or Netwon like step at each iteration in the minimization
algorithm, which requires curvature i.e second derivative information about the ob jective function. For large
problems, evaluating, storing and inverting the hessian H (x) = ∇2 f (x) can be prohibitively expensive due
to limited computational resources. Quasi-Netwon methods like L-BFGS tackle some of these challenges by
eciently storing a Hessian approximation. A Hessian-free optimization algorithm, as the name suggests,
does not explicitly calculate the Hessian at any point. The algorithm is based on the quadratic minimization
model i.e. Newton's method that is described as follows.

Date : Dec 16, 2011.

1

At each iteration k , we seek a search direction pk that minimizes the quadratic approximation to the
ob jective function

(1)

qk (p) = f (xk ) + pT g (xk ) +
≈ f (xk + p) .
For reasons noted in the damping section below, we actually consider B (xk ) = H (xk ) + λI as our quadratic
term, instead of H (xk ). Ideally, we would like to compute
qk (p) ⇒ B (xk ) pk = −g (xk ) .

pT H (xk ) p

1
2

pk = arg min
p

The above problem is a linear system. Hessian free optimization attempts to solve this system using the
conjugate gradient (CG) iterative method, as it only requires matrix-vector products involving B (xk ). The
advantage of this idea is that we can form these matrix-vector products without ever explicitly forming the
Hessian matrix. Evaluating B (xk ) times a vector d is essentially a directional derivative of the gradient:
g (xk + d) − g (xk )

√

B (xk ) d = (H (xk ) + λI ) d = lim
→0

where the limit can be calculated using nite dierences (taking  =
machine precision).
We should note that CG is designed to solve positive denite systems, and that B (xk ) will often be
indenite. We can terminate early or use directions of negative curvature when they are detected to account
for this. Also, the system need not be solved exactly. Often we can terminate the algorithm early with an
approximate solution to get a good search direction.
The basic outline of the algorithm is as follows.

+ λd

Algorithm 1 Hessian-Free Optimization

(1) for k = 1, 2, . . . do
gk ← ∇f (xk )
(2)
compute/update λ
(3)
dene the function Bk (d) = H (xk ) d + λd
(4)
pk ← CG-solve (Bk , −gk )
(5)
xk+1 ← xk + pk
(6)
(7) end for

Recursive Autoencoders - Test Problem

The primary test problem for our implementation of Hessian-free optimization comes from the Semi-
Supervised Recursive Autoencoders for Predicting Sentiment Distributions paper of Socher et al.
[1]. This
paper describes a model where, in a very rough sense, a neural network is used to recursively combine
word/phrase vectors of a sentence in order to arrive at a single vector representing the whole sentence. This
vector might then in turn be used to infer a sentiment for the sentence. We wish to choose the neural network
parameters so that the error both in constructing this recursive combination and in deriving sentiments from
the output vectors is as small as possible. The ob jective function to be minimized is a sum of these errors plus
a regularization term. From this we may see that evaluating the RAE ob jective function is approximately
linear in the size of its data set (assuming a xed distribution on the length of training sentences), a fact we
use to tune HF optimization for maximum eciency. This is the only fact specic to the test problem that
we use; everything else is consistent with a black box model for optimization.

Adapting HF to Machine Learning Problems

Martens describes a number of modications to the basic Algorithm 1 that he claims work particularly
well for neural network training [2]. We describe our experience with implementing his enhancements for
training the RAE model.

2

Damping. The issue of damping is important to consider in the HF approach because we run CG with
implicit access to the true Hessian at each iteration. Thus, unlike with L-BFGS where we maintain a strictly
positive denite approximation to the curvature matrix, we may run across directions of extremely low or
even negative curvature in HF. If we are not careful, moving along such a direction could result in a very large
CG step, possibly taking the algorithm outside of the region where the Newton approximation is even valid.
One solution is to add a damping parameter to the Hessian and consider B = H + λI . This reconditions
H and controls the length of each CG step, mimicking a trust region method. As the condition of B is
constantly changing as the HF optimization algorithm searches, we start with λ = 1 and update λ according
to a Levenberg-Marquardt style heuristic:

if ρk <

elseif ρk >

.

, then λ ← αλ.
, then λ ← α−1λ.

1
4
3
4
where ρk is the reduction ratio measuring the accuracy of the Newton approximation and is dened as
follows:
f (xk + pk ) − f (xk )
qk (pk ) − qk (0)
Martens suggests α = 3
2 but we nd that this value of α is too large for the RAE ob jective. When ρ < 1
4
and the quadratic model is judged to be inaccurate, increasing λ by a factor of α = 3
2 is too extreme and
forces the steplength per iteration to 0, shutting down any optimization. On the other hand when we deem
4 ), taking λ ← 2
the quadratic model as trustworthy (ρ > 3
3 λ leads to underdamping and the steplengths
grow out of control. We nd that a slower ratio of α = 10
9 works well for keeping damping reasonable for
the RAE ob jective.

ρk =

Mini-batching. The CG minimization problem solved in each step of the HF algorithm is only an approx-
imation to the true RAE ob jective. Thus it seems reasonable to also approximate the directional derivatives
H d required by CG if doing so is computationally advantageous. To this end we x mini-batches of the
training dataset per HFO iteration to which we restrict our computation of the ob jective function. In the
RAE example of [1], the training dataset has 9596 sentences/sentiments. If we choose a mini-batch of only
100 elements, each CG step eectively requires only ∼ 1
100 th of a function evaluation. This is the speed
improvement that really makes HFO worth considering.
Martens recommends growing the size of the mini-batch as the HF algorithm progresses, but we actually
nd this not to be the case for the RAE problem. After trying varying schemes of increasing minibatch size
we observe that keeping a xed minibatch size of 100 not only saves on computation but results in a better
ob jective function minimum in the end. More discussion of this phenomenon may be found in the results
section.

Directions of Negative Curvature. Even with damping, CG sometimes computes directions of negative
curvature for B . This is an unavoidable consequence of the RAE ob jective being nonconvex. The standard
approaches are to exit CG and to either step along the last non-negative curvature direction or to step along
the new direction of negative curvature. Our experiments lead us to conclude that there is no clear dierence
between these two approaches.
In [2], Martens recommends using the Gauss-Newton matrix instead of the actual Hessian matrix, as it
is a positive semidenite approximation to the Hessian. Thus, problems with negative curvature in CG are
avoided. We did not use the Gauss-Newton matrix, as our black box abstraction only gave us access to
the Hessian. This may have been an important dierence between our implementation and [2], and better
performance might have been achieved with this approach.

Mini-batched Linesearch. Martens does not mention this addition, but we nd that HF performance is
improved by using backtracking linesearch on the mini-batched function approximation to take a variable
steplength along the direction that CG returns. This is simply another way to take advantage of the relative
cheapness of mini-batched function evaluations.

3

Figure 0.1. Comparing convergence properties. HF v.s. L-BFGS. The left plot gives the
number of HF iterations. The right plot gives the number of function evaluations, where
a function evaluation can be fractional if it only uses a minibatch instead of the whole data
set.

Warm-Starting CG. It is not unreasonable to assume that each CG subproblem is somehow related or
similar. Thus, the solution of two successive search direction problems can be similar. As CG is iterative,
starting the algorithm at a point which may already be close to the solution can reduce the number of
iterations needed to converge. Martens notes, and we agree, that initializing CG at each HF iteration with
the direction output by the previous iteration's CG step improves the convergence rate.

Results and Conclusions

We compared our HF implementation to 70 iterations of the L-BFGS algorithm used in [1]. Plots com-
paring the convergence behavior of the two algorithms are given in the gure.
We observed that Hessian free optimization performs well against L-BFGS at early iterations, but performs
worse later on. We expect this is due to the fact that L-BFGS accumulates curvature information at each
iteration, improving the model of its problem. These early approximations are based on only a few gradient
evaluations, and are thus less accurate.
The Hessian free approach uses only curvature information at the current point, but is potentially ad-
vantageous because it essentially has access to the actual hessian. The relative performance of Hessian free
optimization appears to decrease as the L-BFGS model  catches up to nding the true curvature infor-
mation. However, we should note that there are many parameters to hessian free optimization, including
minibatch sizing, damping parameter, back-tracking, and the treatment of direction of negative curvature.
Tuning these parameters may provide better results on a per-application basis and gives the user added
exibility in adapting the optimization method to his needs that L-BFGS cannot provide to the same extent
as Hessian free optimization does.
We were unable to match the performance of the L-BFGS method. This may be because we did not
suciently tune our implementation. However, it is also very likely that this is due to our use of the Hessian
instead of the Gauss-Newton matrix, which Martens claims often provides better search directions.
Another possibility is that L-BFGS methods may simply be better suited to these types of problems. L-
BFGS makes very good use of the gradient information supplied at each step by incorporating approximate
curvature information into a Hessian approximation. In this way, the information from each gradient is used
many times. In contrast, HF uses a gradient's information just once in each CG iteration. We believe that
HF is most promising when minibatching can be employed to make this drawback less severe.
In conclusion, we think that further experimentation with these methods should be done, exploring the
trade-os between HF and L-BFGS, to determine for which problem domains these methods are best suited.
4

0102030405060702.82.933.13.23.33.43.53.6IterationObjective function value  Hessian freeLBFGS010203040506070802.82.933.13.23.33.43.53.6Function EvaluationsObjective function value  Hessian freeLBFGSAcknowledgements

We would like to thank Professor Andrew Ng and TA Richard Socher for their guidance and assistance
during the course of this pro ject. We also acknowledge the other CS229 teaching sta for their support and
help during the quarter towards the completion of this pro ject and its key milestones.

References

1. Socher, R. et al. Semi-Supervised Recursive Autoencoders for Predicting Sentiment Distributions. Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP 2011).
2. Martens, J. Deep learning via Hessian-free optimization. Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on
Machine Learning (2010).

5

