Automatic Construction of Cell Genealogical Histories 
Matt Jachowski 
Rajesh Ranganath 

 
Introduction 
 
Many research projects in the biological sciences have benefited from software and hardware that allows the 
automatic collection of large amounts of data.  However, the full benefits of having this wealth of new data remain 
unrealized as much tedious analysis is still done by hand. Stem cell research is one sub -field suffering from this 
problem. Stem cell researchers have collected time -lapsed images of microwells populated with dividing stem cells. 
This data has allowed new analysis of stem cell division patterns. The data promises many new discoveries, but 
these discoveries are bottlenecked by the lack of automatic methods for generating cell genealogical h istories. 
 
Initially, it may seem that an off-the-shelf method to identify cells, such as a binary SVM, would be applicable to 
this problem, but the lack of persistent features and the difficulty of solving the overlap problem using joint 
classification leaves this method infesable to solve the  cell genealogical history problem. Therefore we propose a 
more complex approach that hypothesizes cell count sequences, merges the hypotheses using a conditional random 
field, and finally establishes correspondence throughout time using a Kalman Filter. 
 
Methodology 
 
We achieve automatic construction of these cell genealogical histories from movies of dividing cells. Our technique 
involves five steps. In the first step, we apply the Hough circle transform to identify regions highly likely to be cells. 
Next, we apply two algorithms – local maximum finding and weighted k-medoids clustering algorithms – to 
estimate cell counts. Then, we input these two sequences of cell counts as observed variables for a conditional 
random field to generate the most likely sequence of cell counts. Given these determined cell counts, we match the 
positions determined by reapplying the local maximum finding and weighted k -medoids algorithms. Finally, we 
construct cell tracks by establishing interframe cell correspondence with a Kalman filter.  
 
Identifying Cell Regions 
 
Each movie frame that we consider contains a microwell and 
some number of cells contained within the well. To identify cell 
regions, we first apply a bottom-hat filter to the image to isolate 
the microwell and cell boundaries as in [1]. 
 
In early stages of the project, we then proceeded by isolating the 
microwell boundary, easily achieved through segmentation or 
hough ellipse detection, and removing it from the image frame. 
However, we found this approach to be problematic as, in many 
images, cells hug the wall of the microwell, causing these cells 
to be either partially or fully removed by the microwell -removal process. 
 
By applying a Hough circle tranform to detect cells directly from the filtered image, we found that we could achieve 
reliable and robust cell region identification without explicitly removing the microwell. Given an approximate range 
of cell radii, which can be learned from a few expert -labeled cell instances, we apply a series of Hough circle 
transforms for several radii in this range. We then sum the accumulators resulting from each of these trans forms. 
The resulting accumulator exhibits strong peaks at cell centers. After smoothing the accumulator, we threshhold to 
leave only those regions most likely to be cell centers.  

Figure 1. (a) Original Image. (b) Bottom-
Hat Filtered Image. 

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 2. Accumulator resulting from hough 
circle transform being applied to above image.  

Figure 3. Smoothed and threshholded 
accumulator. Spikes represent likely cell regions. 

(a) 

(c) 

(d) 

(b) 

 
Estimating Cell Counts 
 
Given these likely cell regions, we then estimate cell counts with 
two different clustering techniqes. The first technique finds local 
maxima in the smoothed and threshholded accumulator. The 
second technique repeatedly applies the weighted k-medoids 
clustering algorithm to the smoothed and threshholded 
accumulator until it finds a reasonable k.  
 
The k-medoids algorithm is related to the k-means algorithm, 
differing in an added requirement that cluster centers be cluster 
points. Given k, the algorithm finds k clusters and the point 
within each cluster with the minimal distance to all points within 
the cluster. Since each cluster point has a weight – its 
accumulator count – and higher weights correspond to higher 
likelihood of points being cell centers, we employ a weighted 
version of k-medoids to encourage k-medoids cluster centers to 
converge on cell centers.  To optimize the weighted k-means 
objective function subject to the constraint that the centroids 
belong to the set of input points, we use the Partitioning Around 
Medoids algorithm[2]. Finally, since k is unknown, we 
implement an iterated process, where we first hypothesize one 
cell, then two cells, and so on, until some value of k results in the 
algorithm assigning cluster centers that are closer than the 
approximate diameter of a cell. Since two cell centers must be at 
least one cell diameter apart, we can reject this clustering and 
settle on k-1 as the probable cell count.  
 
Conditional Random Field 
 
Given the cell counts estimated by k-mediods and the local maxima finding algorithms, it may seem plausible to 
simply use the cell count estimates of one of the previous frames to localize cells, but this leads to avoid able errors. 
Consider figures 4b and 4d where local maxima finding and k-mediods fail to identify correct cell counts due to 
Hough responses created by the microwell boundary. Another possible avoidable error can occur when one 
technique outputs the correct cell count and the other fails to, due to assumptions made in each algorithm. The 
combination of these errors can lead to different  inaccurate sequences of cell counts from each algorithm.   
 

Figure 4. Estimates of cell counts/positions 
from the local maxima finding algorithm 
(a,b), and the weighted k-medoids 
algorithm (c,d). (a) and (c) are examples of 
when the algorithms work well. (b) and (d) 
are examples of when the algorithms are 
lacking. 

To produce a more accurate sequence of cell counts we implemented a first order conditional random field where 
each state represents a fixed cell count.  We use the two hypothesized count sequences returned by k-medoids and 
the local maxima algorithm as the observed variables of our model.  The mathematical model of our conditional 
random field is given below.  
 

 

 
Where x is the observed input, π is the parse (a sequence of states), and fj is the jth feature  
 
Our condtional random field had two types of features: type 1 features and type 2 features.  Type 1 features are 
functions of multiple sequences of observed variables, while type 2 features are functions of only one.  The score at 
time i is boosted by type 1 features if all the observed cell counts are equal to 𝜋i.  Type 2 features are defined by the 
following formula:  
 

𝑓 𝜋i, 𝜋i-1, 𝑖 ,x  = 𝑝 𝜋i ; 𝜋i-1, σ  ∗ 𝑝 𝜋i ; μ, σ  

 
where μ is the expected value of the observed sequence  with respect to a normal distribution centered at i, and p is 
the normal PDF. 
 
Using our CRF model with the two hypothesized cell count  sequences, we implemented the Viterbi algorithm to 
find the most likely state parse given the observed variables. Since our states represent cell counts, the Viterbi 
algorithm output for the each position represents the most likely cell count.   
 
Finding Cell Centers Given Fixed Cell Counts 
 
Given the cell counts for each frame as determined by the CRF, we reapply the loca l 
maxima finding and weighted k-medoid algorithms to pinpoint cell centers. In the case 
of the weighted k-medoid algorithm, the benefit of predetermined k is clear: we no 
longer need to iterate through possible values of k. However, it is harder to force the 
local maxima finder to return exactly k local maxima for any given frame. We resolve 
this by applying the following method: if the result returns more tha n k local maxima, 
pick the k points with the highest accumulator weights, otherwise return all of the local 
maxima found. 
 
We then apply the Hungarian algorithm [3] to match the corresponding cell centers 
from each algorithm, and output the single cell center in each pair with the highest 
hough circle accumulator weight.  
 
Error Analysis: Cell Count and Position Error 
 
We evaluate our cell count and position error on a 235 frame movie independent from the data used during the 
project development. We define the overall cell count error to be the average of the per -frame cell count errors. The 
overall cell position error is calcuated as the average, over all frames, of the average cell position error in each frame 
(in pixels). 
 

Figure 5. The incorrect 
cell counts displayed in 
(4b) and (4d) have been 
corrected by the CRF. 

 

 

 

 

Cell Count Error = 1Nframescounttrue(i)countobserved(i)counttrue(i)(frame i)Cell Position Error = 1Nframes1Ncellspostrue(c)posobserved(c)2(cell c in frame i)(frame i)Figure 6. Cell count error is on the order 
of 10%. As expected, CRF cell count 
error is the lowest. 

Figure 7.  A histogram of per-frame cell count errors 
shows that over half of the frames are labeled with 
zero error in cell count.   

 
The average cell count error is on the order of 10%, as shown in figure 6. Note that each frame in the  235-frame 
movie analyzed had 2-8 cells, so any under- or over-labeling, even if by one cell, had a signficant impact on the 
error. As desired, the cell count error is smallest for the CRF-
determined cell counts. Additionally, the cell count error for 
the final cell finding algorithm – matching the results of the 
local maxima finding and weighted k-medoids algorithms 
with pre-determined k – is lower than either of the two 
algorithms with unknown k. As shown in figure 7, over half 
of the frames were labeled with zero error in cell count. And, 
the CRF cell count eliminates the most egregious errors in 
the local maxima finder and weighted k-medoids counts. 
 
As shown in figure 8, the average cell position error is on the 
order of 1 pixel. Given that the cells are approximately 6 
pixels in diameter, and human labeling error is also on the 
order of 1 pixel, the cell position labelings generated by our 
method are excellent. 
 
 
Cell Tracking and Track Merging 
 
In the final step of the algorithm, we combine our cell position data to synthesize cell tracks through time. First level 
cell tracking is achieved through use of a Kalman filter [4]. The state of cell i at frame k is given by: 
 

Figure 8. Cell position error is approximately 1 
pixel for cells with diameters of approximately 
6 pixels. 

We observe cell positions, given by:  
 

 
w and v represent process and measurement noise drawn from gaussian distributions.  

  

 

1000010010100101        ,        ,1AwAxxxikikikikikikikikyxyx00100001        ,        ,ˆˆ1HvHzzzikikikikikikyxCell Count Error00.050.10.150.2Local MaximaWeighted K-MedoidCRFCRF Matched-CentersMethodAverage Per Frame Error in Cell CountHistogram of Per Frame Errors in Cell Counts [235 Frame Movie]02040608010012014016000.10.20.30.40.50.60.70.80.9Error BinNumber of FramesLocal MaxWeighted K-MedoidCRFCell Position Error00.20.40.60.811.2Local MaximaWeighted K-MedoidCRF Matched-CentersMethodAverage Per Cell Error in Position [Pixels] 
Given a set of cell states for frame k-1, we calculate the cell states for frame k by applying the Hungarian algorithm 
to match observations in k with states from k-1, and then applying the appropriate Kalman filter. Any cells observed 
in k-1 that are not observed in k are propagated according to the Kalman filter prediction to get a probable location 
in frame k. We allow such propagations to occur up to two frames in a row before we determine that a cell must 
have died. This allows us to continue tracking a cell even if we fail to identify it for one or two frames. Such a case 
might occur when two cells temporarily overlap, or our method simply fails to identify the cell.  
 
Given these cell tracks, we then apply a higher level merging algorithm to merge tracks that represent the same cell 
or descendents of the same cell. This algorithm determines a track label for each track based on its distance, in both 
space and time, to other existing cell tracks. A typical result is shown in figure 9. The dataset we worked with was 
entirely unlabeled, so figure 8 represents the result of our cell tracking and track merging algorithm applied to hand -
labeled cell position data. 
 

 

Figure 9. Cell tracks generated by our 
algorithm.  The plot correctly shows 4 parent 
cells, and one of them (red) dividing. The plot 
incorrectly crosses the green and blue paths.  

Figure 8. Cell tracks generated from hand-
labeled cell position data. There are 4 parent 
cells. One of the cells (red) divides, yielding 
two children. 

 
 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
This paper details our technique for reconstructing cell genealogical histories .  We accomplished this by first 
identifying and accurately counting the cells, then using the counts to confidently localize the cells.  Given this data 
we use the Hungarian algorithm combined with a Kalman filter to establish correspondence  through time.  Our 
method localized the cells accurately and produced promising cell histories as a final result . 
 
Moving forward we would ask the biologists to provide us with higher image and time resolution data to allow us to 
leverage more complex techniques, such as inference on cell contour shape,  to achieve more robust cell detection.  
We would also like to incorporate the estimated cell positions into our  CRF to further improve our results.  Finally, 
we would like to quantify cell histories and compare the results to published techniques such as [5].  
 
References 
[1] “Tracking Stem Cell Genealogical Trees in Mircrowell” Ranganath and Kakaradov. CS223B Project. 2007 
[2] Partitioning Around Medoids. 1987 
[3] “Hungarian Algorithm” Matlab implementation by Alex Melin , 2006. 
[4] “Kalman Filter Toolbox” Matlab implementation by Kevin Murphy, 1998. 
 
[5] “Cell population tracking and lineage construction using Multiple-Model Dynamics Filters and Spatiotemporal 
Optimization”; Li, Kang; Kanade, Takeo; Proceedings of 10 th Intl Conference on MICCAI; 2007, pp. 295-302. 

