 
Localizing a Guidewire in Three Dimensions during Endovascular 
Interventions Using Single-view Fluoroscopy and a Stereo 
Roadmap: Method and Feasibility Study 

1 

Gennadiy Chuyeshov 

 

1 

Introduction 

Interventional  radiology  is  the  medical  specialty  where  instruments  such  as  guide-wires  and 
catheters  are  inserted  into  a patient's  vasculature under  image guidance. During  a  procedure, 
X-ray source-detector pair delivers live images of the anatomy and instruments based on X-ray 
attenuation. 

In  this  context  I  want  to  introduce  an  algorithm  which  makes  it  possible  to  localize  a 
monoscopically-visualized  guidewire  within  a  stereo  roadmap  or  a  3D  reconstruction  of  the 
vessel  tree.  Besides  the  algorithm  itself  I  will  introduce  its  validation  and  implementation 
within our application. 

This  application  is  intended  to  run  in  an  interventional  room,  equipped with  a  Siemens  X-ray 
system  (Fig. 1).  Diagnostic  imaging  capabilities  of  this  system  include  2D  projections  (Fig  2, 
left)  and 3D reconstruction (Fig. 2, right) of  the vasculature. However, during  the  intervention 
when  the  instruments  are  being  guided  by  a  physician  this  system  is  capable  to  produce  only 
2D  fluoroscopic  images  (Fig  3).  The  goal  is  to  display  2D  fluoroscopic  images  within  a  pre-
computed stereo roadmap or a 3D reconstruction. 

Figure 1. Siemens Axiom Artis dBA. 

Figure 2. 2D projection and 3D reconstruction. 

Having 3D data you might want to use some existing product which is capable to fade between 
2D  fluoroscopic  image  and  a  reconstructed  3D  volume,  e.g.  Syngo  iPilot  (Fig  4).  Another 
possibility  is  to  use  RoRo  (Rotational  Roadmapping).  This  application  uses  a  rotational 
acquisition  and  proposes  to  do  roadmapping  directly  on  the  2D  projections.  Alternatively  it 
can  fade  between  2D  fluoro  image  and  a  stereo  pair. Here we  define  a  stereo  pair  as  two DSA 
(Digital Subtraction Angiography)  images acquired at slightly different angles (Fig. 5). The key 
feature  of  this  approach  is  that  it  does  not  require  3D  reconstruction, which  sometimes  could 

 

be  challenging  due  to  the  cardiac  or  respiratory  motion  or  due  to  the  presence  of  the  metal 
due  to  the  cardiac  or  respiratory  motion  or  due  to  the  presence  of  the  metal 
due  to  the  cardiac  or  respiratory  motion  or  due  to  the  presence  of  the  metal 
objects inside the field of view
field of view. 

2 

Figure 3. Guidewire on a fluoroscopic 
Guidewire on a fluoroscopic 
image.      

 
 
Figure 4. Syngo iPilot output. 
Courtesy of Dr. Masaryk 
(Cleveland Clinic Foundation). 
 

      Figure 5. Blended stereo 
pair. 

2 

Problem Statement
Statement 

We  are  given  two  DSA  images  of  a  stereo  pair;  let  us  denote  them  as  left
We  are  given  two  DSA  images  of  a  stereo  pair;  let  us  denote  them  as  left
We  are  given  two  DSA  images  of  a  stereo  pair;  let  us  denote  them  as  left-eye  and  right-eye 
images.  Also  we  are  given  a  single  2D  fluoroscopic  image  which  corresponds  to  the  left
images.  Also  we  are  given  a  single  2D  fluoroscopic  image  which  corresponds  to  the  left
images.  Also  we  are  given  a  single  2D  fluoroscopic  image  which  corresponds  to  the  left-eye 
image of the stereo pair. Let us denote it as a left
image of the stereo pair. Let us denote it as a left-eye fluoroscopic image. Our goal is to find the 
fluoroscopic image. Our goal is to find the 
right-eye fluoroscopic image in order to display a guidewire within a stereo roadmap. Once we 
eye fluoroscopic image in order to display a guidewire within a stereo roadmap. Once we 
eye fluoroscopic image in order to display a guidewire within a stereo roadmap. Once we 
have  found  the  right-eye  fluoro  image  we  can  produce  a  stereoscopic  image  of  the  guidewire 
eye  fluoro  image  we  can  produce  a  stereoscopic  image  of  the  guidewire 
eye  fluoro  image  we  can  produce  a  stereoscopic  image  of  the  guidewire 
by blending left- and right
t-eye fluoro images. 

Figure 6. A point and two profiles, acquired along the same line segments.
A point and two profiles, acquired along the same line segments.
A point and two profiles, acquired along the same line segments. 

3 

Algorithm 

First,  select  a  point  on  the  left
First,  select  a  point  on  the  left-eye  image  of  the  stereo  pair,  and  then  acquire  an  intensity 
eye  image  of  the  stereo  pair,  and  then  acquire  an  intensity 
profile  along  a  horizontal  line  segment  which  goes  through  this  point
profile  along  a  horizontal  line  segment  which  goes  through  this  point
profile  along  a  horizontal  line  segment  which  goes  through  this  point  (see  Fig.  6,  left).  After 
that  we  acquire  an  intensity  profil
that  we  acquire  an  intensity  profile  along  the  same  horizontal  line  segment,  but  on  the  right
e  along  the  same  horizontal  line  segment,  but  on  the  right-
eye  image  of  the  stereo  pair  (see  Fig.  6,  right).  The  goal  is  to  determine  the  distance  between 
eye  image  of  the  stereo  pair
goal  is  to  determine  the  distance  between 
two  peaks,  i.e.  we  need  to  match  these  two  profiles
we  need  to  match  these  two  profiles  (Fig.  7).  Let’s
Let’s  denote  this  distance  as  a 
stereo  shift.  Before  matching  the  profiles 
stereo  shift.  Before  matching  the  profiles  we  apply  window  function  (Fig. 
window  function  (Fig.  8)  in  order  to 
remove other peaks caused by the nearby vessels. We determine the stereo shift using the two
remove other peaks caused by the nearby vessels. We determine the stereo shift using the two
remove other peaks caused by the nearby vessels. We determine the stereo shift using the two 

 

following  techniques.  In  the  first  one,  referred  as  Maximum  Difference  (MD)  we  find  such  S 
which minimizes the maximum difference between two profiles, i.e. 
ܵெ஽ ൌ argmin௦ max௫ ห݌௟௘௙௧ ሺݔሻ െ ݌௥௜௚௛௧ ሺݔ ൅ ݏሻห 
In  the  second  one,  referred  as  Cross  Correlation  (CC)  [1], we  find  such  S which minimizes  the 
following expression. 

3 

ܵ஼஼ ൌ argmin௦ ฬ1 െ ׬ ௣೗೐೑೟ ሺ௫ሻ௣ೝ೔೒೓೟ሺ௫ା௦ሻௗ௫
׬ ௣೗೐೑೟మ
ሺ௫ሻௗ௫

ฬ. 

Figure 7. Left- (red) and right-eye (blue) profiles 
together. 

 

Figure 8. Window function. 

On  Figure  9  green  and magenta  curves  correspond  to  the MD  and  CC  algorithms  respectively. 
These  functions  both  depend  on  the  shift  value.  Easy  to  see  that  the  shift  value  which 
minimizes both functions corresponds to the number we need to shift the right profile in order 
to match it to the left one. 

Figure 9. Sample output. 

 

 
Figure 10. Examples of displacement maps: MD (left) and 
CC (right). Shift value is marked by color. 

4 

Implementation 

After  physician  selected  a  working  view  we  pre-compute  all  the  possible  shift  values  for  the 
corresponding  stereo  pair,  and  then  we  compute  a  displacement  map  (Fig. 10),  i.e.  for  every 
pixel  of  the  left-eye  image  we  extract  left  and  right  intensity  profiles,  and  then  determine  the 
shift value  and  save  the  result  into  the  look-up  table. Having  selected  an  appropriate working 
angle physician acquires  live  fluoro sequence. Consider a single  frame  from  this sequence. We 
apply  fluoro mask  to  this  image  and  binarize  it,  and  perform  noise  filtering.  Next,  every  non-
black  pixel  of  the  left-eye  fluoro  image  is  shifted  according  to  the  displacement map. Now we 
can display a guidewire within a stereoscopic image of the corresponding vessel tree (Fig. 11). 

 

4 

Figure 11. Stereo guidewire. 

 

Figure 12. Six paths on an 
skeletonized image. 

 

Figure 13. Computed guidewire (blue) 
and the ground truth (green). 

5 

Validation 

To  test  this  concept we  need  to  compare  our  results  to  the  ground  truth. However, we  do  not 
have the ground truth in this case, since we cannot acquire two live fluoro sequences from two 
slightly  different  angles  simultaneously.  However,  we  can  get  around  it  by  employing  the 
following  idea.  Consider  a  stereo  pair,  let’s  skeletonize  both  images  and  label  skeletonized 
right-eye  image  as  the  “ground  truth”.  From  the  left  image we  extract  six  central  paths which 
go through the major vessels (Fig. 12, 14). 

Figure 14. Simulated (red) and computed (blue) guidewire visualized within a stereo roadmap. 

 

Here is how we perform the validation process. We use this path and the corresponding stereo 
pair  to  compute  its  location  in  the  right-eye  image.  Then we  compare  the  computed  image  to 
the  ground  truth  (Fig  13). We  calculate  the  score  for  every  path  as  a  number  of  points which 
overlap  the  corresponding  skeletonized  path  in  the  right-eye  image  (considered  as  the 
“ground  truth”).  We  should  mention  that  two  points  are  considered  overlapping  if  their 
centers are within 0.5 mm from each other (this number is specific to the dataset and depends 
on  the  pixel  thickness). On Table  1  you  can  see  how  both algorithms  performed  on one  of  our 
datasets. 

5 

 

 

#  
1  
2  
3  
4  
5  
6  

Cross Correlation  
Maximum Difference 
86/98 (88%)  
86/98 (88%)  
78/90 (87%)  
88/90 (98%)  
150/197 (76%)  
183/197 (93%)  
55/65 (85%)  
58/65 (89%)  
124/152 (82%)  
149/152 (98%)  
44/61 (72%)  
54/61 (88%)  
Table 1. Comparison of MD and CC algorithms. 

6 

Conclusion 

First of all, we think  that it is feasible to find the  location of a guidewire  in  the right-eye image 
of  a  stereo  roadmap,  given  its  location  in  the  left-eye  image.  Secondly,  stereoscopic 
visualization  of  the  vessel  tree  and  the  guidewire  looks  “convincing”  and,  finally,  we  can 
process live fluoroscopic image sequence in real time. 

7 

Acknowledgements 

We gratefully acknowledge support from Siemens Medical Solutions. 

References 

D. Ballard, C. Brown, Computer Vision. Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1982. 

8 

[1] 
 

