Wall, Floor, Ceiling, Object Region Identification from 
Single Image 
Zhong-Ju Zhang   
Stanford University 
junez@stan ford.edu 

Abstract 
It  is  often  helpful  to  iden tify  large,  relevan t  reg ions  in  an   image;  this   can  help  to  facilitate  applications  such   as  
object  recognition, object  track ing, and 3D  reconstruction. We explored  a  simp le  algorithm of using K-means  to  
cluster  images  of  indoor  scenes  in to  4  regions  roughly  corresponding  to  1)  ceiling,  2)  wall,  3)  floor,  and  4)  
objects  (non-ceiling,  wall,  floor)  regions;  then  we  used  logistic  regression  to  iden tify  the  segmented  clusters  to  
the  corresponding  regions .  K-means   segmentation  perfo rms  well  for  unclu ttered  scene  with  large  and  
uninterrupted wall and  floor areas.  Ceiling and object  regions are harder  to  segmen t.  Identification of  segmen ted  
region is poor, ach iev ing only 50% accuracy using logistic regression. 
Keywords: image segmentation, reg ion identification , K-means 

Introduction 
1 
In  image  processing ,  it  is  often  useful  to  be  able  to  
separate  and  classify  large  reg ions  in  an  image. 
Identifying  image reg ions as ground or sky was useful 
for  Hoiem  et  al.  in  learn ing  3D  geometric  context 
from  a  single  image  [1].  Identifying  large  regions  can  
also 
the 
track ing  by  allow ing 
image 
improve 
algorithm  to  focus  more  effectively  on  objects  of 
interest.  
 
Hoiem  et  al.  used  supervised  learning  algorithm  w ith  
78D  feature  vector  to  segmen t  and  identify  regions  in  
outdoor  scenes.  In  this  paper,  we  choose  to  analyze 
indoor 
scenes 
in  order 
to 
identify 
regions  
corresponding  to  1)  ceiling,  2)  wall,  3)  floor,  and  4) 
objects 
reg ions)  by 
floor 
(non-ceiling,  wall, 
employ ing  fast  K-means  cluster ing  algorithm  for 
segmen tation   and  logistics  regression  for  reg ion 
identification .  

2  Segmentation 

2.1  K-Means Algorithm 
K-means   clustering   algorithm  does   not  make  any 
probabilistic 
assumptions  on 
the  data.  One 
disadvan tage  of  K-means  is  that  users  have  to  guess  
the  to tal  number  of  clusters ,  k,  in  the  image  before 
segmen tation .  Its   performance  is  not  as  good  as  more 
sophisticated clustering  algor ithms  such  as  mean  sh ift 
[2].  However ,  for  our  purpose  of   identifying  large 
regions (e.g. wall, floor), we argue that a sophisticated  
cluster ing  algorithm  is  unnecessary  as  indiv idual 
objects in the scene all belong to one reg ion− object.  
We  applied  K-means  cluster ing  (K=4)  over   feature 
space to f ind the ceiling, wall, floor, and object reg ion 
in indoor scenes. 

2.2  Features 
We  tried  to  choose  a  feature  space  that  is  descr iptive 
of  the  image  by  incorporating  colour,  spatial,  and 
texture descr iptors.  

2.2.1   Texture Energy 
We used Law’s Texture Energy algorithm  to compute 
the  tex ture  energy  of  each  pixel.  The  1D   texture 
masks  are: 

 

Nine  5x5  2D  texture  masks  can  then  be  constructed  
by  combining  the  1D  masks:  L5E5 ,  L5R5,  E5S5, 
S5S5, R5R5, L5S5 , E5E5, E5R5 , S5R5 [3]. 
We convolved  the blue  intensity channel of  the  image 
with  the  9  d ifferent  5x5  Law’s  tex ture  matrix.  The 
texture  energy  of  a  pixel  is  the  sum   of  the  absolu te 
value  of  the  convolution  result  of  its  8  nearest 
neighbours. 
Experimentally, incorporating the L5E5 and L5R5  
Law’s  texture energy gave the best segmentation 
result as shown in F igure 1 , F igure 2, F igure 3. 

 

 

b) 
a) 
Figure 1. a)  Test image 1, b) K-means  clustering 

]14641[)(5]10201[)(5]12021[)(5]14641[)(5!!=!!=!!!!==rippleRspotSedgeElevelLin  F igure  4,  to   use  as   reg ion  labels  for  training  test 
image 1.   

 

 

 
Figure 4. Hand labelled reg ions for test image 1 
train ing 
labels, 
4 
created 
We 
;  the  label  is  1  if  the  pixel 
belongs  to  that  region,  0  if  it  does  not.  We  use  the 
following  notation  for  describ ing  a  feature  poin t: 
,  i  corresponds  to  the 
total  number  of  p ixels  in  an   image  that  is   mxn,  j 
corresponds  to  the  4  segmented  clusters .    Using 
logistic regression, we f ind 4 sets  of parameters:  

 

b) 
a)  
Figure 2. a)  Test image 2, b) K-means  clustering 

 

a) 
b) 
Figure 3. a)  Test image 3, b) K-means  clustering 
Table 1. Features for each p ixel 

Num 
3 

Feature Descriptors 
Colours 
RGB values (scaled) 
Spatial 
X, Y values (scaled) 
Texture 
L5E5, L5R5  (scaled) 
 The  colour,  spatial,  and  texture  values  are  scaled  by 
weights  so  that  R,  G,  B,  X,  Y ,  and  the  L5E5  texture 
value  are  approximately on  the  same  scale. The  L5R5  
value is  scaled to be 1/6  the L5E5 value.  

2 

2 

3  Region Labelling 
Major  regions  in  the  image  can  be  found  using 
segmen tation .  However,  clustering  assignment 
is  
mean ingless;  with  every  run,  different  clusters  are 
found  in  difference  sequences .  For  instance,  the  3rd 
cluster  corresponds  to  floor  pixel,  wh ile  in  another  
cluster ing  iteration,  the  3rd  cluster  may  correspond  to  
wall  pixels.  We  tried  using  logistic  regression  to  
identify  the  segmen ted  clusters   as  1)  ceiling,  2)  wall, 
3)  floor,  and  4)  objects  (non-ceiling,  wall,  floor 
regions)  by  solv ing  for  parameters  that  maximize  the 
likelihood a given set of features belongs to one of the 
4 major  reg ions. We  choose  a  d iscr iminative  learn ing 
algorithm  as  opposed  to  a  generative  algorithm  (e.g. 
Gaussian  D iscr iminan t  Analysis)  because  we  d id  not 
want  to  make  any  probab ilistic  assumption  on  the 
distr ibution  of the feature descr iptors. 

3.1  Training using pre-labelled image 
To  test  the  performance  of  logistic  regression  for 
identification , we hand  labelled  the  test  image,  shown 

 

3.1.1   Labe lling 
After  obtaining  the  parameters ,  for  each  region,  we 
then compute: 

 

where 
,  is  the  centroid  point  identified  by  K-
means   for cluster 1. We do  this   separately  for all  four 
regions:  ceiling , wall,  floor,  and  objects . We  assigned  
the  reg ion  label  to  the  cluster  w ith  the  highest 
probability.  A  secondary  condition 
the 
that 
is 
probability  need  to  be  larger  than  0.25  to  avoid  false 
positives .  Figure  5  shows 
the 
resu lt  of 
the 
identification  for test image 1.  

  

objectwallfloorceilingyyyy,,,4..1,...1,7==!"jmnixij!!!!========mniobjectiiobjectobjectmniwalliiwallwallmniflooriifloorfloormniceilingiiceilingceilingxyPxyPxyPxyP1111);|(logmaxarg:);|(logmaxarg:);|(logmaxarg:);|(logmaxarg:"""""""""""");|();|();|();|(4321wallcentroidclusterwallwallcentroidclusterwallwallcentroidclusterwallwallcentroidclusterwallxypxypxypxyp!!!!centroidclusterx1 

 

 
Figure 6. Reg ion labelling of test image 3 

3.2  Training using structure labelled 
image 
Instead  of  using  pre-labelled  image  to  train  the 
identifier, we  used  an  artificial  reg ion  label,  shown  in 
Figure  7,  based  on  the  assumption  that  the  ceiling  is  
above  the  wall,  and  the  floor  is  below  the  wall  in  the 
image. 

 
Figure 5. Reg ion labelling of test image 1 . Wh ite 
region are clusters  that is  assigned the corresponding 
class label. 
Even  for  a  trivial  case,  log istic  regression  resu lt  is  
quiet  poor,  despite  the  fact  that  the  segmentation 
results  were  quiet  good  for  the  major  reg ions  of  the 
image (see Figure 1). 
Using  the  parameters   obtained  by  using  the  label 
shown  in  F igure  4,  we  then   tr ied  to  cluster  the 
different  but  similar  looking  test  image  3  (see  Figure 
3) 

 
Figure 7. Assumed structure label. 
Since  the  assumed  reg ion  label  does   not  contain  any 
information  regarding object  region, we  can  only  f ind 
parameters  corresponding  to  ceiling,  floor,  and  wall 
using log istic regression. 
For  identif ication,  we  assign  label  ceiling,  floor,  and 
wall  to  clusters  that  have  the  max imum  probabilities  
of  being  these  regions .  For  identifying  the  ob ject 
cluster,  we  choose  the  cluster  that  has  the  min imum  
probability  of  being  ceiling,  f loor,  and  wall  region. 
Figure  8,9  shows  the  result  of  iden tif ication  using  the 
assumed structure reg ion label. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

5  Future Work 
It  is   apparent  that  conven tional  logistic  regression  is  
not  a  good  identif ier .  It  would  be  useful  to  try 
generative  learning  algorithms  (e.g.  naïve  bayes)  for 
identification .  A  more  descriptive  feature  vector  can  
also  help . 

6  References 
[1]  D. Hoiem , A . Efros , M. Herbert, “Geometr ic 
Context from  a Sing le Image”, 
www.cs .cmu.edu /~dhoiem/publications/Hoiem_
Geometric.pdf 
[2]  http://www.caip.rutgers.edu/riu l/research /code.ht
ml 
[3]  http://www.cse.msu .edu/~stockman/CV /F05Lect
ures/Weeks1_9/week06-texture-LS.pp t 

 
Figure 8. Reg ion labelling of test image 1  using 
structure labelled image 

 

 

 

 
Figure 9. Reg ion labelling of test image 2  using 
structure labelled image 

4  Result 
K-means  segmentation  performs  well  for  a  well-
behaved  image w ith  large wall  and  f loor  area.  For  all 
the  test  images  we  tried,  the  ceiling  was  clustered  
together with  the wall  because  it  has  the  same  texture 
and  colour  as  the  wall.  W ithout  geometr ic  cues,  it  is  
unlikely  that  any  clustering  algor ithm  w ill  be  ab le  to  
separately cluster  ceiling from  wall reg ion. The ob ject 
regions 
are 
clustered  with  varying 
success.  
Depending  on  the  amount  of  objects  in  a  space,  they  
could be clustered as  one or more clusters. 
The  reg ion  labelling  resu lts   are  quiet  poor  even  for 
images  w ith  good  segmentation  resu lts .  Ceiling  and 
floor region are usually never identified because many 
probability  values  end  up  being  zero.  Clusters  are 
usually  iden tif ied  correctly  as  wall  reg ions  with  h igh 
probability.  Object  reg ion  identification  success  can  
vary.  The  accuracy  of  object  reg ion  iden tif ication  is  
dependent  on  how  well  K-means  segmentation 
separated   objects  from   floor,  wall  clusters .  In  most 
cases,  object  reg ions  can  also  partially   contain   wall 
and/or floor regions as well. 

