Predicting Protein Interactions with Motifs

Jessica Long

Chetan Sharma

Lekan Wang

December 12, 2008

1 Background

Proteins are essential to almost all living organisms. They are comprised of a long, tangled chain of amino

acids, of which there are twenty of the organic molecules. Proteins also tend to fold into distinctive shapes
with certain idiosyncratic structures, with names such as  β -sheets,  α-helix, and  β -hairpin, which we

typically call secondary structures. Combinations of these structures give rise to motifs in proteins, and

some of these motifs have functional properties, such as mineral binding, protein-protein interactions, and

enzymatic eects. The property we will consider is protein-protein interactions. Understanding which

proteins interact is an important part of understanding biological processes, as many bodily functions are

triggered by protein signaling pathwaysseries of proteins that interact, each causing the subsequent protein

to re-fold in a slightly dierent way that allows it to interact with the next protein, and that protein will

re-fold and interact with the next, and so on until the nal protein is activated to do something biologically

useful.

2 Data

In our problem, we deal with two matrices:
The matrix indicating the presence of each motif in each protein which is a subset of Rm×n , where
n = number of proteins
m = number of motifs
This matrix has values Aij ={1 if protein i interacts with protein j, 0 otherwise}

We used a dataset of 4481 proteins and 8089 motifs. Both the associations matrix, A, and the interaction
matrix, B , were extremely sparse matrices. Most proteins interact meaningfully with few other proteins,

and most proteins have few of the motifs. The proteins, on average, interact with 35.9 other proteins, and

contain 2.626 motifs. This made it dicult to nd a relevant subset of the data to reduce the features for

classication or to take repeated samples for bagging. A relevant set of proteins and motifs means that each

protein shares a motif with one othe protein, and also that the set of proteins have multiple interactions.

1

This diculty with nding a smaller relevant bootstrap sample, as well as the sheer size of the matrices

made our bagging algorithm require prohibitively large amounts of computation time.

3 Boosted Decision Trees

Finding a complex rule in classication is often extremely computationally dicult. However, it is often

easier to nd many simple rules of thumb and let them work in tandem rather than nding a single complex

rule. This is the inspiration behind boosting, in which many simple rules are found in multiple rounds, and

in which the samples that are classied incorrectly in each round are then given more weight in the next

round.

3.1 Basic Boosting Algorith

The basic boosting algorithm is as follows (Schapire, 2003):

Initialize D1 (i) = 1/m
for t = 1, . . . , T :

• Train base learner using distribution Dt
• Get base classier ht : X → (cid:60)
• Choose an αt ∈ (cid:60)
• Update Dt+1 (i) = Dt (i) exp(−αt yi ht (xi ))
Qt

(cid:33)
(cid:32) T(cid:88)
where Qt normalizes Dt+1 to a distribution.
αtht (x)
t=1

(cid:17)
(cid:16) w+
Once trained, the classier can output prediction with H (x) = sign
, where w+ is the number of positive samples, and
−
w
t

With the AdaBoost algorith, we choose αt = 1
2 ln
w− is the number of negative samples.

√
Since we are using boosted decision trees, we need to determine the relative position of the new node. We
w+ · w− .
will do this by nding Zi = w0 + 2

3.2 Upper Bound using Zpure

One of the innovative parts of our procedure is the idea of Zpure (Kunjade, Anshul). As captured by our
algorithm, calculating Zi runs in O(n2 ) time, where n is the number of samples. To make the algorithm
more ecient, we calculate a best possible Z at each leaf, called Zpure . Zpure is the value that Zi takes on
when a particular rule classies all negative examples, or all positive examples correctly.

We know that:

(1) in the case where the rule classies all negative samples correctly:
w (cid:48)
0 = w0 + w+(cid:48) = 0; w−(cid:48) = w−

2

(2) in the case where the rule classies all positive samples correctly:
w (cid:48)
0 = w0 + w− ; w+(cid:48) = w+(cid:48)w−(cid:48) = 0

So calculating Zpure is computationally quite simple as compare to calculating all other values of Z_i.

Ordinarily, it is necessary to calculate Zmin at every leaf to nd the absolute minimum Zmin . However, if
the current Zmin is lower than Zpure , then we know that the lowest possible value of Z at that particular
leaf cannot be less than our current Zmin . This means that we do not need to calculate Zmin at the Zpure
leaf, thus saving computational time.

3.3 AdaBoost Results

Using our adaboost algorithm with 100 iterations, we found the training loss to be 0.791067%, and the test
loss to be 0.877136%, which means all but a few of the positive protein interactions were misclassied. In
each iteration, the optimal motif pair is chosen and its weighted classications added to the tree. In some

iterations, even the optimal motif pair results in a loss in training error because of the weightings of the

respective positive and negative labels. In this case, the weight of the positive interactions for the motif

pair overweigh the negative interactions, and make the training loss increase. However, the error generally

decreases with iterations of the algorithm. However, due to the sparsity of the matrices, the model takes a

long time to converge, as each motif pair covers few protein combinations.

We ran the algorithm again with a reduced set of features. Instead of using all 8089 motifs, we used the 569

motifs that occurred in two or more dierent proteins, and re-classied with those. This required much less

computational power, and didn't signicantly increase the error. This is expected, as the boosted decision

tree would have only used the more commonly associated motif pairs to predict, resulting in the same motifs

being chosen. If we had the computational power to run many iterations, then the error would be dierent

as the algorithm reaches motif pairs that occur in fewer and fewer proteins.

The AdaBoost algorithm will likely work better if other features were used in addition to motifs (secondary

structures, surface charge, etc), or if we could nd a data set with more motif commonalities. More train-

ing data, in the form of more proteins or more motifs, would also help the boosted algorithm nd more

commonalities between the proteins on which to predict.

See gures at the end of the document for further information.

4 Naive Bayes

4.1 The algorithm

Because boosting with so many rounds took a signicant amount of time, we also implemented Naive Bayes

as a way to get some quick results. Given a distribution of whether or not two proteins interact, conditioned

on the the joint distribution of the two vectors of motifs associated with the two proteins, we have:

3

p(I (cid:126)m(cid:126)n | (cid:126)m, (cid:126)n) =

=

p( (cid:126)m, (cid:126)n|I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n )p(I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n )
p( (cid:126)m, (cid:126)n|I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n = 0) + p( (cid:126)m, (cid:126)n|I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n = 1)
p(m1 , n1 |I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n )p(m1 , n2 |I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n ) · · · p(mj , nk−1 |I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n )p(mj , nk |I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n ) · · · p(I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n )
(p(m1 , n1 |I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n = 0) + p(m1 , n1 |I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n = 1)) (p(mj , nk |I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n = 0) + p(mj , nk |I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n = 1)) · · · .

where |m| = j and |n| = k . The second line is from the Naive Bayes assumption that individual features
(the motifs) are independent.

We built up a matrix of counts, counting the presence of each motif in each pair of motifs present at each

interaction or non-interaction. Then, we take the margins of every row and column of counts, and, after
applying LaPlace smoothing, nd the joint distributions of all (cid:126)m, (cid:126)n., and each I (cid:126)m,(cid:126)n . Then, to predict, we
simply calculate both p(I (cid:126)m(cid:126)n = 0| (cid:126)m, (cid:126)n) and p(I (cid:126)m(cid:126)n = 1| (cid:126)m, (cid:126)n), and compare which one is larger. Because the
products in both the numerator and denominator risk underow, we use the log-probability, log p(I (cid:126)m(cid:126)n, | (cid:126)m, (cid:126)n),
in the prediction phase.

4.2 Results

Because Naive Bayes required calculating over each motif pairing of each protein pair, the problem was
O(m2n2 ), using the denitions of m and n given in section 2. With nearly 5000 proteins and 10000 motifs,
we couldn't eciently process the entire data set, so as in boosting, we selected some of the proteins and

motifs that had the least sparse data, and ran Naive Bayes over those data. The result was similar to
AdaBoost, with a 0.781%train error and a 0.895%test error, so very few of the positive protein interactions
were classied correctly. Again, we attribute this to the overwhelming ma jority of non-interactions over

interactions.

5 Conclusions

In the end, we tried several dierent algorithms, but had limited success due to the sparseness of our data.

Ideally, we would have liked to make the data more concentrated. We tried to limit our data set, but it

was dicult to nd sparse subsets within the data and more dicult to predict whether these would be

representative subsets of proteins and motifs.

Our primary algorithm was moderately successful, yielding a test loss that was almost half as much as random

chance. It's possible that running more iterations of the algorithm would have given us better results, but

throughout the rst fty iterations, our test loss and train loss remained completely stable. Concerned by

the lack of updating on successive iterations, we turned to Naïve Bayes and Adaboost to give us a better

sense of how traditional machine learning algorithms handled our particular data set. Unsurprisingly, the

results from both algorithms were fairly poor, given the small number of interactions on which to condition

future predictions.

We believe that better results could be attained in the future by using data with more of the protein

interactions already lled in.

4

6 References

Jothi, Ra ja, and Przytycka, Teresa M., Computational approaches to predict protein-protein and domain-

domain interactions, National Center for Biotechnology Information.

Ng, Andrew, CS 229 Notes, 2008, http://www.stanford.edu/class/cs229/materials.html

Schapire, Robert E., The Boosting Approach to Machine Learning: An Overview, Nonlinear Estimation

and Classication, Springer, ATT Labs, 2003.

Acknowledgment to Anshul Kunda je, Postdoc under Serm Batzoglou and Arend Sidow, Department of

Computer Science, Stanford University.

5

Full Feature Selection Training Error, 8089 Motifs, 100 Iterations 

 
Full Feature Selection Test Error, 8089 Motifs, 100 Iterations 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Smaller Feature Selection Training Error, 569 Motifs, 50 Iterations 
 

Smaller Feature Selection Test Error, 569 Motifs, 50 Iterations 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

