Restoring focus in photographs: extraction of the point-spread
function

Jeﬀ Keacher

December 12, 2008

1

Introduction

Out-of-focus images are the bane of the modern pho-
tographer. While error in exposure, cropping, and
color can often be easily ﬁxed in post-processing, er-
rors in focus are not so simple to erase. The most
common approach to dealing with an out-of-focus im-
age is to use a tool like “unsharp mask,” which in-
creases the apparent sharpness of the photo but does
not correct the fundamental focusing mistake. This
is because the unsharp mask procedure increases the
acutance (essentially, the edge contrast) instead of
reversing the blur. Fortunately, a technique that ap-
plies deconvolution can recover the latent sharp im-
age from the observed blurry picture.
Formally, we can represent the captured (blurred)
image B with the equation

B = L (cid:63) P + N

(1)

where L represents the latent sharp (unblurred) im-
age, P represents the point-spread function (dis-
cussed below), (cid:63) is the convolution operator, and
N represents noise. We will assume that the noise
term N models the collective sensor noise, quantiza-
tion noise, and compression noise.
The point-spread function (PSF) is, by deﬁnition,
a model of how a point source of light is modiﬁed and
distorted by an optical system, such as a camera lens.
This is particularly visible in terrestrial photos as the
image of the aperture (typially a circle or a polygon)
that is visible in out-of-focus images of bright lights.
For most terrestrial cameras with wide-open aper-
tures, the PSF appears as a large fuzzy disc. The
PSF is also related to the quality of the image bokeh,
which is the pleasant blurring of the background that
can be produced by a lens with a large aperture. It
can model more than just out-of-focus blur; the PSF
can also model motion blur (caused by a moving ob-
ject or moving camera) and atmospheric distortion
(often observed by ground-based telescopes).

There are two classes of deconvolution: blind and
non-blind.
In non-blind deconvolution, the PSF is
known but the latent sharp image is unknown. The
noise may or may not be characterized. In blind de-
convolution, both the PSF and the latent sharp im-
age are unknown, and the user is left to recover one
or both of them. Since it is generally impractical to
measure directly the PSF of an optical system with-
out access to specialized equipment, we will focus on
the blind case.
This paper discussed a method to recover the PSF
from a blurry image, minimizing the number of scope
of assumptions about the PSF, the latent sharp im-
age, and the blurry image.

2 Related Work

Many methods have been proposed for recovering the
sharp image and the PSF. Some operate by estimat-
ing the latent sharp image directly and then compar-
ing the estimate to the observed blurry image to infer
the PSF. Others operate by doing statistical analysis,
modeling the blurry image, latent sharp image, and
PSF in probabalistic terms.
One of the oldest techniques, still in use today, is
the Richardson-Lucy algorithm, which iteratively ar-
rives at a solution by alternately optimizing the latent
image estimate and the PSF estimate. Richardson-
Lucy saw extensive use in the astronomy community,
and it is still the default blind deconvolution method
in Matlab. However, it is poorly suited to terrestrial
images.
Recent work by Shan et al. (2008) solves for the
latent image and the PSF using probability models of
the image, noise, and PSF. These results have been
demonstrated to be particularly useful when applied
to motion-blurred images. However, the assumptions
about the nature of the PSF, namely that it is sparse,
might not be applicable to images blurred due to fo-

1

cus errors.
Fergus (2006) describes a similar method using nat-
ural image priors. They attempt to recover the PSF
for an image using a variational Bayesian framework,
which allows them to solve for the PSF directly.
There has also been some work in better applying
the recovered PSF. In particular, Levin et al. (2007)
discusses methods of restoring focus to particular ob-
jects in a scene using sub ject-identiﬁcation techniques
and focus-error-estimation methods. These concepts
should be amenable to a variety of PSF recovery and
deconvolution techniques.

3 Our approach

We attempt to extract the unknown PSF for a blurred
image using natural image statistics. This is similar
to the approach of Fergus (2006).
Natural images, such as photographs of landscapes
and people, tend to have statistical similarities. One
such area is in the distribution of gradients within the
image.
Sharp natural images tend to have heavy-tailed
gradient densities (such as 1), but blurry natural im-
ages tend to have gradient densities with small tails
(such as 2). Intuitively, this means that the sharp
images have more high- and mid-frequency compo-
nents than blurry images.
Our algorithm attempts to ﬁnd the PSF that, when
used during the deconvolution of the observed blurry
image, produces a sharp image with a gradient den-
sity most similar to this heavy-tailed ideal. No ad-
ditional assumptions are placed on the images and
PSF.

4

Implementation

The PSF recovery algorithm was implemented in
Matlab. For the deconvolution function, we chose
to use the deconvL2 frequency function developed
by Levin et al.[4], due to its fast performance, good
results, relative immunity to noise. We tuned the
weights required by this algorithm to provide the best
results for the image being processed, as were the
other parameters needed by the algorithm described
above.
A sample of natural images were used to tune the
parameters used for the gradient match. The two
parameters of particular interest were the inﬂection
points in the log gradient density curves. Empirically,

Figure 1: Plot of absolute value of log10 -density of
(cid:79)L, the density of a sharp image. Note the heavy
tail.

Figure 2: Plot of absolute value of log10 -density of
(cid:79)B , the density of a blurry image. Note the lack of
a heavy tail.

the ﬁrst point corresponds with the point at which
the blurry image curve diverges from the sharp image

2

curve. The second point corresponds with the upper
bound of the “smooth” gradient curve, beyond which
there is a sharp falloﬀ and noise dominates.
The PSF was calculated iteratively. A delta func-
tion (a single non-zero pixel in the PSF, located at
the center) was used for the starting PSF. Then, using
stochastic gradient descent, the algorithm iteratively
optimized each pixel of the PSF to minimize the cost
function. As alluded to earlier, the cost function was
a least-squares measure of the diﬀerence between the
modeled “ideal” gradient density for a sharp photo
and the observed gradient density, calculated by de-
convolving the current iteration of the PSF with the
observed blurry image.
In order to decrease running time, we chose to op-
erate on progressively larger versions of the original
observed blurring image. This allowed us to start
with a small image, for which the processing time is
short, and generate a good estimated starting point
for the next-larger image size.
A summary of the algorithm follows:

1. Estimate gradient density of the latent image
based on the characteristics of natural images
and the observed blurred image.

2. Resize the blurry image and the working PSF
size to be smaller

3. Iterate through all of the pixels of the PSF, up-
dating using stochastic gradient descent

4. Repeat Step 3 until the cost function (the dif-
ference between the estimated gradient density
and the gradient density obtained by deconvolv-
ing the blurred image with the current iteration
of the PSF)

5. After convergence, resize the blurry image and
working PSF to the next larger step size

6. Repeat until the blurry image is at its original
size

7. Output the full recovered PSF

Once the PSF was inferred, we extracted the latent
sharp image using the same deconvL2 frequency
function that was used in the algorithm. The image
statistics on the recovered image were then plotted,
and the image was evaluated sub jectively for sharp-
ness.

Figure 3: Ground truth (sharp) version of the sample
image.

5 Results

Images with two types of blur were tested: those with
out-of-focus blur (such as the sample image in Figure
4), and those with motion-blur. In both cases, the im-
ages were real photos captured with a DSLR camera.
The images were cropped so that the entire image
expressed nearly identical blur, which eliminated the
need to solve for spatially varying PSFs.
The algorithm successfully converged on PSFs that
minimized the cost function:
images deconvolved
with the derived PSF exhibited gradient-density func-
tions with the desirable heavy-tailed characteristics.
The improvement in this metric is clearly visible in
Figure 7 for the sample image.
In that sense, the
algorithm was very successful.
For the blurry sample image, the algorithm recov-
ered the PSF shown in Figure 6. This PSF is gener-
ally consistent with the expected shape of a PSF for
out-of-focus images: a fuzzy disc. However, there are
two faint vertical lines on the left side of the PSF that
are both unexpected and of unknown origin. Vertical
lines in PSFs are typically associated with vertical
motion blur, but no such distortion was present in
the observed image.
Unfortunately, the algorithm was very slow to con-
verge, especially for larger images or PSFs. This
due to both the deconvL2 frequency function, which
uses several fast-Fourier transforms, and the need
to iterate over every pixel in the PSF, which grows
exponentially on every size increase. As such, the
run time was extremely sensitive to the parameter
specifying the upper bound on the PSF size. With

3

Figure 4: Observed version of the sample image, with
out-of-focus blur, captured in a diﬀerent frame than
the ground truth sharp image. Note the fuzzy ap-
pearance of the lines on the lens box.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 7: The absolute values of the densities of the
log-gradients for the ground truth sharp image (a),
the observed blurry image (b), and the sharp image
recovered with the inferred PSF (c). Note the im-
proved weight of the tail in (c) compared to (b).

1.0-megapixel images and 15x15 pixel maximum PSF
sizes, run times on the order of 15-20 minutes were
not uncommon.
Once the algorithm converged, the resulting PSF
was still suboptimal. Visual artifacts (e.g., ringing)
indicated that the level of ﬁt between the true (un-
known) PSF and the inferred PSF was not as good
as it could have been.
Most apparent was the remaining blurriness in the
recovered latent images. Clearly, the resulting im-
ages, such as the example in Figure 5 would be con-
sidered “sharper” but not “sharp,” especially when
compared to the ground truth sharp images, such as
Figure 3. Experience suggests that the recovered
PSF needs to be larger and have sharper edges in
order to provide a better representation of the true
(unobserved) PSF.

Figure 5: Recovered latent sharp image, derived us-
ing the inferred PSF. While the image is not perfect,
it is perceptibly sharper, especially around the eyes
of the plush doll.

6 Conclusion

Figure 6: Recovered PSF, enlarged and contrast-
enhanced for publication clarity.

From the results we observed, we conclude that recov-
ering the PSF based solely on attempting to match
natural image gradient distributions leads to a sub-
optimal end.
It is unclear if making use of addi-
tional natural image characteristics, such as color
data, would, all else being equal, lead to a better
outcome.
Based on the work of others, we suspect that
the performance would be improved if the algorithm
placed constraints on the PSF, such as enforcing
sparseness or limiting gradients.

4

References

[1] Jalobeanu, A., Blanc-Feraud, L., and
Zerubia, J. 2004. An Adaptive Gaussian Model
for Satellite Image Deblurring. IEEE Transations
on Image Processing 13(4):613-621

[2] Joshi, N. 2008. Enhancing Photographs using
Content-Speciﬁc Image Priors. PhD dissertation,
University of California San Diego

[3] Kovacs, L., and Sziranyi, T. 2007. Evalua-
tion of Relative Focus Map Based Image Indexing.
International Workshop on Content-Based Multi-
media Indexing

[4] Levin, A., Fergus, R., Durand, F., and
Freeman, W. T. 2007. Deconvolution using nat-
ural image priors. SIGGRAPH

[5] Levin, A., Fergus, R., Durand, F., and
Freeman, W. T. 2007. Image and depth from a
conventional camera with a coded aperture. ACM
Transactions on Graphics, SIGGRAPH

[6] Li, J., et al. 1995. Measurement and Analysis
of Defocused Point Spread Functions and Optical
Transfer Functions of a Microscope. IEEE Paciﬁc
Rim Conference on Communications, Computers,
and Signal Processing Proceedings

[7] Roth, S., and Black, M. J. 2005. Field of
experts: A framework for learning image priors.
CVPR

[8] Savakis, A., and Trussell, H. J. 1993. On
the Accuracy of PSF Representation in Image
Restoration. IEEE Transations on Image Process-
ing 2(2):252-259

[9] Shan, Q., Jia, J., and Agarwala, A. 2008.
High-quality Motion Deblurring from a Single Im-
age. SIGGRAPH

[10] Tzikas, D., Aristidis, L., and Galatsanos,
N. 2007. Variational Bayesian Blind Image De-
convolution with Student-T Priors. IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Image Processing

5

