Portfolio replication with sparse regression

Akshay Kothkari, Albert Lai and Jason Morton ∗

December 12, 2008

Suppose an investor (such as a hedge fund or fund-of-fund) holds a secret portfolio
of assets, which may change over time. Suppose further that the investor makes public
the overall returns on this portfolio on a regular basis, as is the case wth hedge funds,
funds of hedge funds, and indexes of hedge funds. There are many reasons why we might
want to replicate the performance of this portfolio. One is to gain exposure to the same
sources of risk and return while avoiding the high fees and liquidity restrictions typically
imposed by these investment vehicles. Alternatively, we may already be invested and
wish to hedge the risk of a signicant downturn in the fund or fund of funds. As we
cannot know its holdings, we are forced to estimate them statistically.
Most practical strategies for replication available today make use of a rolling regres-
sion against fewer than ten factors. These factors are selected in advance by hand. We
instead investigate the use of L1 -regularized regression to choose the regressors from a
large universe of securities automatically. We consider four simple types of strategies to
replicate, one static and three dynamic, all based on one or more true weight vectors
hP .

1. The buy-and-hold portfolio. Given a total initial portfolio value of V dollars and
initial weight vector hP , this strategy buys V hP
i of asset i at price Si and simply
holds the assets for the duration. A good replication strategy for a buy-and-hold
portfolio should quickly converge to the true weights nP in terms of the number of
shares V hP
I /Si initially bought of each asset and perform minimal or no further
reweightings or trades once the true portfolio is found. The weights in terms of
value of this strategy will change over time.

2. The xed constantly rebalanced portfolio. Given an initial weight vector hP , this
stratgy rebalances every period to hold asset i in proportion hP
i of the total value
of the portfolio, selling and buying as necessary. A replication strategy for a
xed constantly rebalanced strategy will try to nd hP and thereby match the
rebalancing trades of the true strategy each period.

3. The xed periodical ly rebalanced portfolio, a hybrid of the rst two. This strategy,
common in practice (e.g. it is used by many ETFs and mutual funds) rebalances
back to the initial weights hP every n periods. A replication strategy must implic-
itly nd both hP and n.

4. The xed periodical ly rebalanced with change points portfolio. Here the target
weight vector hP changes at several points over the course of the observed period,
where new securities may be added and existing ones dropped at the change point.

∗

Not in the class, but helped out and provided advice.

1

We use real return series from the S&P 500, and synthetic portfolios for types 1-3. For
type 4, we look at the performance of our method in replicating a few ETFs which follow
this type of strategy.

1 Algorithms

We experimented with a variety of algorithms for rolling regularized regression using
lasso regressors, and clipped stochastic gradient descent. We report on the most suc-
cessful variant. This algorithm uses a rolling lasso estimator on the residuals to select
which portfolio weights to consider updating, and an unconstrained regression on the
winners to x the nal weight changes themselves.
The winners were deemed to be assets with coecients greater than one standard
deviation from than the mean, which is very close to zero due to the sparsity. Because
we would like to have long only portfolios for simplicity, all coecients are constrained
to be positive.

Input: Return series of investible assets (rt ) and benchmark asset (bt ). A window w,
relative sparsity parameter α, and unconstrained regression inclusion threshold .
Output: Vector of (continuosly rebalanced) portfolio weights βt at each time point after
the initial w.

Initialize: Parameter vector βw−1 = 0
for each time point t:
• Compute residuals et−w,...,t = rt−w,...,tβt−1 − bt−w,...,t , where rt−w,...,t
is the w × p matrix of returns on the p investible assets during w
periods in the rolling window
• Let ξ be the L1 -regularized coecients of et−w,...,t regressed on
rt−w,...,t with sparsity parameter α.
• Set γ = βt−1 + ξ
• Clip all elements of γ < 0 to 0
• Let I = {i ∈ {1, . . . , p} | γi > }, the set of assets appearing with
nonzero coecients in γ
• Let η be the coecients of the unconstrained regression of et−w,...,t
on r(t−w,...,t),I , the assets in I .
• Set βt = βt−1 + η

A stochastic version of this algorithm was also shown to be eective; however it did
not converge as quickly and had noisier results. The cost of extra computation in the
rolling window algorithm is not as serious an that of requiring more time. That is, in
a real world situation, one would rather spend more computing power than wait more
days for the regression to converge, so the rolling window algorithm was chosen.

2

2 Experiments

The rst goal was to replicate a synthetic portfolio of ve equally weighted, constantly
rebalanced assets drawn from the S&P 500. Then using Least Angle Regression as the
lasso regressor in our algorithm, determine if it is able to pick out the correct stocks. To
see the algorithm's response to a varying portfolio, it was run against synthetic portfolios
where the assets change weights, are added, and get dropped. It was seen that the longer
the window, the smoother the results and fewer false positives. However, longer windows
also resulted in slower convergence and becuase time is valuable, slow convergence rates
are very detrimental to algorithm performance. Thus a rolling window of 30 days was
used.

Figure 1: Coecients Output by Algorithm on Synthetic Portfolio

As seen in Figure 1, the change point was at day 180 where an asset was dropped
and then picked up again at day 280. Here, the algorithm selects some extra coecients
before damping them back to zero. Raising the shrink parameter results in faster con-
vergenge, but creates more noise and instability. In these experiments, a shrink of 0.05
was used.
Once it was veried that the algorithm can identify the correct assets in a toy prob-
lem, the algorithm was run on real-world data, which we chose to be several Exchange
Traded Funds. The funds were regressed against the S&P 500 from June 2005 to Novem-
ber 2008. The method to judge accuracy was to take one dollar initially invested in the
ETF, and one dollar invested in the algorithm's CS229 Fund both at time t0 and compare
the subsequent returns.
Because it is not desirable to rebalance the portfolio daily due to the costs of trading,
the CS229 Fund samples the output of the algorithm every four weeks and rebalances
the portfolio to the new coecients. The cost of trading was not factored directly into
the algorithm and should be involved in future work, but monthly rebalancing suited
the purposes of the experiment. Additionally, one wishes to avoid having to trade a
very large number of stocks of miniscule weight. Thus only the assets with coecients
greater than 0.02 were included in the portfolio. These coecients do not necessarily
sum to one, so this subset of coecients is normalized to prevent gaining or losing extra
leverage. These coecients are the portfolio of the CS229 Fund.
Recent events in the economy provided the unlucky opportunity to run the algorithm
on bullish as well as bearish markets. As shown in the Figure 2, the CS229 Fund tracks
w ((cid:80)t
fairly well for the two ETF's. The error is most apparent when the ETF is experiencing
a high rate of change, in particular mid-2008 when the markets began falling.
t−w (actual − predicted)2 )1/2 for a window is also plotted in
The standard error 1
Figure 2. The error rates are well below 0.01 until the sudden recent downturn beginning

3

Figure 2: Plots for Replicating Two ETF's

in 2008 where error rates climbed to 0.05. However, the error slowly shrank in recent
months. Figures 3 and 4 indicate that greater number of coecients, or assets present in
the CS229 Fund, are associated with greater errors. Determining whether it is a causal
relationship is worth investigating. It could be the case that a large error causes the
algorithm to select more assets in an attempt to make up for the error, or having too
many assets results in overtting.

Figure 3: Error vs. number of assets when replicating the IVV iShares ETF

Figure 4: Error vs. number of assets when replicating the IVE iShares ETF

4

3 Conclusion

As shown, the L1 regularized regression with rolling windows works well with ETFs.
The LARS regression was very good at picking out the proper assets out of a large
universe. However to obtain the coecients, drastic improvement were obtained by
regressing the target again against the reduced universe consisting only of the assets
with larger coecients. In bullish as well as bearish years the tracking error was fairly
small, however sharp declines yielded large errrors. With monthly rebalancing, the CS
229 Fund replicates ETF returns with a maximum mean square error of 0.05 and shows
much promise for further investigation.

4 Future Work

We would like to test the algorithm with existing hedge funds using the returns available
from TASS database. Also, we would like to model the costs associated with rebalancing
to nd the optimal rebalancing frequency, a metric that we overlooked in this pro ject.

References

[1] B. Efron, T. Hastie, I Johnstone and R. Tibshirani, Least Angle Regression. Annals
of Statistics, 32(2), 2004, pp. 407-499.

[2] A. Lo and J. Hasanhodzic, Can hedge-fund returns be replicated?: the linear case.
Journal of investment management, 5(2), 2007, pp. 545.

[3] A. Ng. Feature selection, L1 vs. L2 regularization, and rotational invariance. In
Proceedings of the Twenty-rst International Conference on Machine Learning, 2004

[4] W. Fung and D. Hsieh, Empirical characteristics of dynamic trading strategies: the
case of hedge funds. Review of Financial Studies, 10, 275-302.

5

