Airline Departure Delay Prediction

Brett Naul
bnaul78@stanford

December 12, 2008

1

Introduction

As any frequent ﬂier is no doubt aware, ﬂight delays and cancellations are a largely inevitable part of
commercial air travel. In the past ten years, only twice have more than 80% of commercial ﬂights arrived
on-time or ahead of schedule. Punctuality is an issue for all ma jor carriers, with some struggling more than
others: through September 2008, American Airlines ﬂights were on time just 66.9% of the time, bottoming
out at 58.8% on-time in the month of June.
In many cases, the causes for delays are unpredictable. For example, as of September 30th , 2008, 24.6% of
ﬂights were delayed; of these delays, 43% can be traced back to inclement weather. But in many other cases,
historical data would suggest that some ﬂights are far more likely to be delayed than others, even without
taking present or future weather conditions into consideration. The airline itself is an obvious predictor of
the chance that a ﬂight is delayed; as mentioned previously, American Airlines often has one of the highest
percentages of delayed ﬂights among all carriers, while Southwest Airlines consistently beats the national
averages for punctuality.
Despite the extreme complexity of ﬂight patterns in the United States, there are many factors that do
allow us to gauge the likelihood of a ﬂight being delayed. The aim of this pro ject is to use large historical
datasets to make predictions about the punctuality of future ﬂights far in advance, e.g. for a customer in
the process of purchasing tickets for a future ﬂight.

2 Data

Searchable ﬂight data from the last 20+ years is available for download from the Bureau of Transportation
Statistics, part of the Research and Inovation Technology Administration and the Department of Transporta-
tion[1]. This database includes basic information such as carrier, origin/destination, and expected departure,
as well as detailed delay information. For the purposes of the this paper, only departure delays are studied.
However, preliminary results suggest that the same analyses are valid for arrival information, as well.

2.1 Data Collection
Given that there are up to 30, 000 commercial ﬂights per day in the United States, this is a truly massive
dataset. I limited my analysis to the seven ma jor carriers (American, Delta, Continental, Southwest, US
Airways, United, and Northwest) and ﬁfty highest-traﬃc airports. The same techniques can be applied to
additional airports and carriers outside the very busiest, but including these greatly increases the amount of
data that must be analyzed, since proportionally more total data points are needed to extract a signiﬁcant
sampling of less-traveled routes.

2.2 Features
The data from the BTS is very comprehensive, so I was able to include a wide variety of features in my anal-
ysis, including: Day of Week, Month of Year, Day of Year, Holiday Proximity, Airline, Origin, Destination,
Scheduled Departure Time, Actual Departure Time, and Distance (only used in arrival time prediction). It

1

may not be obvious that these features are adequate for our prediction problem; Figure 1 provides some
motivation by showing that these features are indeed strongly correlated with delay.

Brett Naul

Figure 1

One type of feature that is conspicuously absent from the list above is weather data. Without a doubt,
weather is the most important factor in airline delays. However, the primary motivation for this pro ject is to
be able to provide information long in advance of the travel date (e.g. when a passenger is ﬁrst ticketing his
or her ﬂight, perhaps many months in advance). Weather models are reliable up to at most a week into the
future, and so in most cases would not apply to the problem at hand. Long-term climate models can give
seasonal information, but I claim that this information is largely redundant: in particular, the existing model
already takes into account geography and season, so inserting vague climate data would only unnecessarily
complicate the setup.

3 Methods

Using the data and features described above, we wish to be able to calculate some measure of the expected
delay or likelihood of delay for an arbitrary future ﬂight. There are a number of possible such measures that
could be useful; this section lists the various delay estimators considered, as well as methods for computing
them.

3.1 Binary Classiﬁcation
The FAA oﬃcially designates ﬂights that miss their declared departure or arrival time by more than 15
minutes as “delayed.” Using this criteria (or even with a diﬀerent cutoﬀ ), we can attempt to predict
whether a future ﬂight will fall into the category “on-time” or “delayed.” I attempted to solve this problem
using a number of classiﬁers, including logistic regression (both weighted and unweighted), Naive Bayes
classiﬁers, and SVM classiﬁers (with linear, polynomial, and Gaussian kernels). For the ﬁrst two, I used
my own MATLAB routines; for the last, I used SVMlight [2]. Ultimately, none of these attempts produced
satisfactory results, but I attribute this to the nature of the problem itself, rather than the method (see
Results).

3.2 Estimated Delay
One very useful quantity to produce would be an estimate (in minutes) of the amount by which a ﬂight will
be delayed. In the Binary Classiﬁcation problem, most of my models exhibited severe overﬁtting, so for the
regression problem I attempted to use simpler methods. In particular, I computed most of my regression
estimates using my own MATLAB implementation of weighted linear regression, which solves the weighted
normal equations in a space-eﬃcient way in order to compensate for the extremely large number of training
examples.

2

3.3 Probability Estimation

Brett Naul

3.3 Probability Estimation
An “easier,” more tractable problem than that of binary classiﬁcation is estimating the probability that a
ﬂight is delayed. I experimented with multiple models for this problem, but ultimately found that the speed
and simplicity of Naive Bayes best complemented the structure of the problem. In particular, I used my
own MATLAB implementation of the Naive Bayes classiﬁer, and adapted it so that features are modeled
as multinomial rather than Bernoulli random variables. The features themselves are easily modeled by
multinomial distributions, since they all take on bounded integer values. Because of the algorithm’s extreme
simplicity, I was able to train it on full months, or even years, of ﬂights (upwards of 10,000,000 at once).

3.4 Comparison with Historical Averages
Since the context of this pro ject is predicting delays at purchase time, it felt natural to compare my methods
with those used by many travel websites (e.g. kayak.com, orbitz.com). In particular, these sites provide
consumers with delay warnings for ﬂights that are historically prone to delay (a ﬂight in this case is identiﬁed
only by its route and ﬂight number, so that the same ﬂight might occur daily, weekly, etc.). Using the
information on ﬂights from the last several years, I created an algorithm that searches for past instances of
a given ﬂight, and uses the sample mean of these past ﬂights as a sort of naive historical predictor. One of
my primary goals was to improve upon this method of prediction, as it is the one most commonly used in
practice.

4 Results

4.1 Binary Classiﬁcation
My attempts at binary classiﬁcation of future ﬂights were unsuccessful to say the least. Figures 2 and 3
demonstrate the learning curves for test and training error for the Naive Bayes and Support Vector Machine
classiﬁers. The Naive Bayes classiﬁer’s error is shockingly low at ﬁrst glance, but upon further examination
the results are less surprising. Since the algorithm constructs probability estimates for the on-time departure
of each ﬂight, it only predicts that a ﬂight will depart late if its estimated probability is greater than 50%.
Intuitively, it is clear that very few ﬂights would actually have a greater than 50% chance of being late;
although the long-run fraction of delayed ﬂights is as high as 25%, the variance is not high enough that
many ﬂights would be more likely to be late than on time.

Figure 2

Figure 3

The Naive Bayes classiﬁer’s outputs were consistent with the idea that ﬂights are inherently more likely to
be on-time; its classiﬁcations consisted of anywhere from 90 to 95% negative (i.e. on-time) predictions. Since
up to 80% of all ﬂights are on-time, this results in a seemingly low error rate for such a diﬃcult problem;
in reality, the error is almost the same as simply predicting that every ﬂight will be on time. The error on
the training set is nearly as high as the test error, indicating that this classiﬁer suﬀers from high bias, as we
would expect.

3

4.2 Estimated Delay

Brett Naul

The Support Vector Machine classiﬁer, on the other hand, performs extremely well on the training set,
achieving perfect accuracy for sets of up to 1500 training examples. But these results do not translate to
impressive performance on the test set; indeed, even given several thousand training examples, the test
set error remains much worse than that of the Naive Bayes classiﬁer. The data in Figure 3 comes from a
Gaussian Kernel with γ = .1, C = 1, but all variations on these parameters produced similarly poor results.
It is clear that the problem is one of high variance, but I saw no way to resolve this issue. The number
and variety of ﬂights in the United States is so high that any prediction algorithm must be able to digest
hundreds of thousands, if not millions, of training examles; even with my relatively small feature space, the
quadratic programming problem for the optimal margin classiﬁer becomes unreasonably complicated as the
number of training examples approaches this point. For the remaining problems, I tried to make use of
simple, fast algorithms that would be able to handle the millions of training examples needed to describe
ﬂight patterns.
I also experimented with reducing the number of airports and carriers considered in order to give the
SVM classiﬁer another chance. Ultimately I did not pursue this strategy as it felt like I would have been
cheapening the problem, or at least reducing it to a narrower and less interesting one. It also cuts down on
the diversity of the already small feature space, which did not seem like a prudent strategy. Furthermore,
I decided that the classiﬁcation problem is not really the best one to consider; it is too much to expect our
algorithm to predict exactly which ﬂights will be on time. Instead, I attempted to develop statistics that
would distinguish more ﬂuidly between varying degrees of punctuality.

4.2 Estimated Delay
The regression problem associated with ﬂight delays is predicting the exact number of minutes by which
a ﬂight will be delayed (recall that the FAA only classiﬁes a ﬂight as “delayed” if it misses its scheduled
departure by at least 15 minutes). Initially, I expected this aspect of the problem to be infeasible; as with
the classiﬁcation problem, expecting an algorithm to give an exact delay prediction seems in some sense to
be expecting too much. However, I was surprised by the success of simple regression methods. Figure 5
shows the test error of locally-weighted linear regression using Gaussian weights with bandwidth parameter
τ = .15. Small bandwidth parameters performed better in general; intuitively, we would like our prediction
to depend primarily on very similar examples, as the relationships between parameters are highly nonlinear
(e.g. Delta, is not “closer” to American than other airlines in any meaningful sense, although they are
labeled 1 and 2, respectively).

Figure 4

The predictions were far from perfect, but nevertheless improve upon the naive historical predictions gen-
erated according to section 3.4. The mean error of the least squares predictor was 8.22 minutes (generated
using 200,000 training examples, after which there was no discernable improvement), compared with 10.9
minutes for the historical estimator. This result is perhaps not terribly meaningful, especially since travel
sites do not present passengers with this type of information. Nevertheless, it is worth nothing that this very
simple approach was able to generate surprisingly good predictions.

4

4.3 Probability Estimation

Brett Naul

4.3 Probability Estimation
The most useful and plausible method of predicting of ﬂight delay turned out to be probability estimation.
These probabilities allow travel agencies to warn buyers before they commit to a delay-prone route, and
similarly they allow passengers to make smarter and more conﬁdent purchasing decisions. Fortunately, this
was also the aspect of the problem in which machine learning techniques enjoyed the most success. As seen in
Figure 6, the multinomial Naive Bayes predictor deﬁnitively outperformed the historically-based estimates
In the classiﬁcation problem, the error was seemingly quite good, but
used by many online travel sites.
in reality the predictions were largely uniform and uninformative.
In contrast, the probability estimates
themselves are varied and really illuminate which ﬂights are comparatively prone to delay.

Figure 5

It is not obvious what the best way to test these probability estimates should be, and it is even less obvious
how the “error” should be interpreted. Thankfully, the sheer amount of data provided one way to diagnose
our results: the same combinations of features appear numerous times throughout the BTS database, so
it was possible to compute one set of “past” estimates to use as the historical estimators, and another of
“results” to which we could compare our predictions.

5 Conclusion

In all aspects of this problem, simple, uncomplicated algorithms outperformed more sophisticated methods.
The number of training examples required to encapsulate the patterns that characterize the aviation system
is truly staggering, and complicated techniques were unable to digest this quantity of information in a
reasonable quantity of time. Furthermore, the simple algorithms actually performed rather impressively: in
particular, the Naive Bayes probability estimates proved to be more accurate than the historical estimates
used by many travel sites. The success of the Naive Bayes predictor is reason to believe that such a method,
or perhaps a similar machine learning technique, could be eﬀectively employed by travel agencies to provide
improved delay estimates to its customers.

6 References

1. Bureau of Transportation Statistics. TranStats Database. http://www.transtats.bts.gov/

2. T. Joachims, Making large-Scale SVM Learning Practical. Advances in Kernel Methods - Support
Vector Learning, B. Scholkopf and C. Burges and A. Smola (ed.), MIT-Press, 1999.

5

