Learning to Automatically Discover Meronyms

Austin Shoemaker and Varun Ganapathi

December 17, 2005

Abstract

We present a system for automatically discovering
meronyms (noun pairs in a part-whole relationship)
from text corpora. More precisely, our system begins
by parsing and extracting dependency paths similar
to (but not the same as) those used by (Snow et al.,
2004). For each noun pair we calculate an empiri-
cal distribution over dependency relations, which are
then used as features of a Support Vector Machine
classier. Noun pairs are labeled as meronyms if
there exists a path traversing only meronym and hy-
pernym links between the nouns. Since the method
of labeling training examples treats sentences as bags
of words, our training examples are extremely noisy.
However, we are able to nd a classier that performs
better than similar previous work.

1

Introduction

Many natural language processing applications de-
pend on ontologies such as WordNet in order to ob-
tain prior knowledge about the semantic relationships
between words. Unfortunately, the domain of Word-
Net is limited in scope, and is time-consuming and ex-
pensive to maintain and extend. Furthermore, Word-
Net has no concept of probability. For a given word,
WordNet stores a list of its relations to other words,
but does not store the probability of the occurrence
of that relationship in normal usage. Recently, sub-
stantial interest has been directed toward the idea
of automatic detection of semantic relations between
words.
Automatic extraction of semantic relations be-
tween nouns from text corpora is important to many

Natural Language Processing tasks. Search would
benet from the ability to perform shallow seman-
tic queries. For example one would like to be able
to search for all terms that bear semantic relation to
some other terms. One important semantic relation
to extract is the part-whole relation, otherwise known
as meronymy. One question that one would like to be
able to ask is Does X contain Y? or What does X
contain? (The latter of course being a harder ques-
tion.)

The meronymy relation is surprisingly ambiguous
as the authors discovered when trying to manually
label sentences. Unlike other relations, meronymy
relations often apply only to a specic instantiation
of an entity rather than the general case. For in-
stance, The dog had brown fur and oppy ears. In
this case, it is only the dog in this specic sentence
that has brown fur and oppy ears. Should one la-
bel brown fur as a meronym of dog? Or merely label
fur and ear as a meronym of dog, since most dogs
have fur and ears. It's clear we're making decisions
based on background knowledge rather than knowl-
edge conveyed by the sentence.

Our task is to detect when pairs of words could
possibly be meronyms under normal circumstances.
In other words, even though in one particular set-
ting a man may have a tail, we would hope that our
system would not strongly imply a meronymic rela-
tionship between man and tail. In general, a car has
windows(even though there are jeeps), so we would
want the algorithm to identify window as a meronym
of car.

1

1.1 Related Work

While part-of-whole relations have been studied in
great depth in the liberal-arts, we were unable to
nd many papers investigating automatic methods
for discovery of meronyms. Hearst (Hearst, 1998) in-
vestigated the use of high-precision lexico-syntactic
patterns indicative of hypernymy relations. How-
ever, this approach was not successful when applied
to meronymy, because the common patterns were also
indicative of other semantic constraints.
Berland and Charniak identied ve lexical pat-
terns that tend to indicate part-whole relations by se-
lecting the patterns that maximized a likelihood func-
tion p(w|p) and a variation of same, where w is the
outcome of the random variable generating wholes,
and p is that for parts. Meronyms were selected by a
"surprise" metric, which is high when p(w|p) (cid:29) p(w),
or a signicant- dierence test. The proposed system
was about 55% accurate on the top 50 proposed parts.
Girju et al. worked on improving the results of
Hearst's approach. Hearst's method of using lexico-
syntactic patterns lters the input corpus resulting in
noun pairs that are more likely to be in meronymic
relations. In that paper, they learned semantic con-
straints using WordNet class labels as features in
order to remove false-positives from the result of
applying lexico-syntactic patterns. They achieved
83% accuracy, but involved the use of much manual
work; The corpus was rst ltered by hand-picked
lexico-syntactic patterns, word-sense disambiguated
by hand, and nally class-labels were extracted from
WordNet. As such, we do not see them as a fair com-
parison to the work we describe here.
Snow et al. (2005) propose an automatic method
using dependency-paths for automatically identifying
noun pairs in a hypernymy relationship.
In spirit
our approach to the problem is similar, although we
modify the feature set and use a dierent classier.

2 Methodology

Our approach is as follows:

1. Training:

(a) Collect noun pairs from corpora

(b) For each noun pair, collect sentences where
the nouns occur together.

(c) Parse the sentences and extract dependency
paths relating pairs.

(d) Label each noun pair with its features using
WordNet

(e) Train a classier based on this data

2. Test:

(a) For any pair of nouns, extract features and
apply classier.

2.1 Generation of Features

We mostly follow Snow et al.
in our feature extrac-
tion. Based on the assumption that local syntactic
structure can help predict certain semantic relation-
ships, such as meronymy, we selected features that
encapsulate the syntactic relationship between a pair
of nouns as they occur in a given sentence. These
patterns are called dependency paths. We apply a de-
pendency parser, which produces a directed acyclic
graph of syntactic relations between words. The de-
pendency path, then, is the shortest path separating
the noun pair in this graph. A single semantic rela-
tion is expressed as relation(word1[pos], word2[pos]),
where wordn[pos] represents the word in a specic
syntactic class, and relation marks the manner in
which one word governs the other.
We make one modication to the feature extraction
algorithm as follows. Even with moderately large cor-
pora, sparsity can still be a problem, making it more
dicult to classify new examples. Our system com-
pensates for this by introducing anonymized depen-
dency path features, which describe the grammatical
structure of the syntactic relationship while leaving
the identity of the specic words unspecied. This
improved results signicantly.

2.2 Generation of Labels

We labeled each of the noun pairs extracted from our
corpora automatically using WordNet. Of course, we

2

lost examples if WordNet did not contain the pairs of
nouns, which happened quite often. Given a noun X
and Y, we label Y a meronym of X if in WordNet it is
possible to reach Y from X using only hypernyms and
meronymy relations. Consider the following example,
where x < y means that x is a meronym of y , and
x > y means that x is a hypernym of y :

management~{management}
> {directorate,board_of_directors}
< {board}

This was derived from  Peter Cawdron, group strat-
egy development director, and Bil l Shard low, group
personnel director, wil l become part of the board 's
management committee.
Beginning from the word in the sentence manage-
ment, the system looks up the sense (or senses) in
WordNet coresponding to that word and then search
for senses matching board. In this case we see that
management contains a board_of_directors which is
a type of board. Hence, the management contains a
board. This doesn't always work out so well:

level ~ {floor,level,storey}
< {structure,construction}
> {foundation, base}

This noun pair was derived from the following sen-
tence: This has increased the risk of the government
being forced to increase base rates to 16% from their
current 15% level to defend the pound, economists
and foreign exchange market analysts say.
As one can see, word sense ambiguity results in
spurious labelings of sentences. Such spurious sen-
tences create dependency paths between nouns that
are not indicative of meronymy. Despite such exam-
ples, it's the case that while this particular sentence
may not be informative of the relation bewteen level
and base, other sentences may contain more valuable
relations, and our classier may be able to tease out
the relationship. We provide this as an example of
the noisyiness of the data on which we are operating.
In order to examine the value of the WordNet la-
bels, we hand-labeled 3998 noun pairs as meronyms.
We consider a pair of nouns to be meronyms if the

Figure 1: WordNet Compared To Human Labeling

nouns actually were semantically related in the sen-
tence. Of these, a small number actually were in
a meronymic relationship. Figure 2.2 displays the
confusion matrix of WordNet's labels vs the human
labels. It's clear that WordNet is adding signicant
noise to the training data.

2.3 Training

We used SVMLight to train several classiers using
dierent kernel and gamma values. Since the fre-
quency of meronyms in data is extremely low, on the
order of 1%, we created balanced training and test
sets by subsampling the negative examples.
We began with a 500k-sentence corpus from the
1996 New York Times. After processing, this resulted
in a total data set size with 160,200 pairs. Of these,
about 2000 pairs were in a meronymy relationship.
We created a balanced training set of 1500 positive
and 1500 negative example, a balanced test set of 500
positive and 500 negative examples.

3

Linear
Gaussian (RBF), γ = 0.002

Precision Recall
23.73%
62.67%
61.26%
27.05%

Figure 2: Comparison of SVM kernels

Figure 3: Precision/Recall for RBF kernel, γ = 0.002

3 Results

In the table below you can see the precision/recall
as reported by SVMLight for various parameter set-
tings. We experimented with various kernels, includ-
ing linear, polynomial, and found that the RBF ker-
nel performed best. We selected the γ parameter
for the RBF kernel to be .002 using LOOCV. Figure 3
displays the precision recall curve. As you can see,
the classier can achieve quite high accuracy rates
when the recall is limited. This is reasonable con-
sidering that WordNet is an extremely noisy sample
of the truth. Therefore, many of the positive exam-
ples are actually random, in a sense, because none
of the dependency patterns are actually indicative of
meronymy.

We plan to test the classier against human labeled
data to see how it fares against WordNet.

4

4 Future Work

This research has illustrated the strengths of us-
ing syntactic structure to predict semantic structure,
while underlining the reality that complex relation-
ships such as meronymy can often only be inferred
with a sucient understanding of the local semantic
context.
While our classier was trained using WordNet,
we recognized that with our human-labeled data as
ground truth, WordNet achieves only 15% precision
and 5.4% recall. WordNet, aside from error result-
ing from annotation mistakes, by denition cannot
represent semantic relations in terms of context, and
thus limits the ability of our classier to grasp hu-
man intuition. Moving forward, it is clear that the
next step is to collect more human-annotated data
and train on much larger text corpora.
The authors speculate that incorporating a proba-
bilistic model for co-reference resolution would likely
improve classication accuracy substantially, because
it would enable syntactic relations to be traced across
sentences. Part of the challenge lies in the fact that
meronymy relations are often assumed to be back-
ground knowledge, and the words frequently occur
together with no explicit mention of the relationship.
Analyzing context across sentences could potentially
capture these patterns of discourse.
Our analysis using WordNet shows that the ratio
of the number of holonyms and meronyms stemming
from a word sense was strongly indicative of its own
meronymy; e.g.
if an entity contains many things,
then in general it is more likely to be a holonym. Con-
versely, items that are part of many entities are more
likely to be a meronym in any given situation. This
could perhaps be estimated by counting the number
of occurrences of "of X" or "X's" without considering
the other noun. The next step is to add such proper-
ties to the feature lists of the noun pairs themselves.

5 Conclusion

We have investigated the challenges of automat-
ically extracting holonym-meronymy relationships
from text corpora, and proposed an SVM classier

based on an extension of syntactic dependency paths.
The best classier had 61.26% precision at 27.05%
recall. Our eorts have illustrated the challenge and
promise of identifying meronymy relationships using
global syntactic structure. The authors believe that
signicant improvements in accuracy can be made
with a larger quantity of human-labeled data, and by
leveraging the intrinsically context-dependent nature
of meronymy in more sophisticated ways. This prob-
lem is emblematic of many of the challenges faced
in NLP research today, and its solution will enable
an order of magnitude improvement in information
access and discovery technologies.

References

Berland and E. Charniak. 1999. Finding Parts in Very
Large Corpora. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics, pages 57Ð64, College Park, MD.

R. Girju, A. Badulescu, and D. Moldovan. 2003.
Learning Semantic Constraints for the Automatic
Discovery of Part-Whole Relations. In Proceedings of
the Human Language Technology Conference / North
American Chapter of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics Conference, Edmonton, Canada.

Marti A. Hearst. 1998. Automated discovery of word-
net relations. In Christiane Fellbaum, editor, Word-
Net: An Electronic Lexical Database. MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.

T. Joachims, Making large-Scale SVM Learning
Practical. Advances in Kernel Methods - Support Vec-
tor Learning, B. Schlkopf and C. Burges and A.
Smola (ed.), MIT-Press, 1999.

Rion Snow, Daniel Jurafsky, and Andrew Y. Ng,
"Learning syntactic patterns for automatic hypernym
discovery". NIPS 2004.

5

