 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STAIR Subcomponent: 
 
Learning to Manipulate Objects from Simulated Images 
 
 
 
Justin Driemeyer 
 
CS229 Term Project 
 
December 15, 2005 

 
Overview 
 
 
For my project, I am working with 
Ashutosh Saxena on a subcomponent of 
the STanford AI Robot, i.e. STAIR.  
One of the goals for STAIR is to be able 
to pick up and manipulate objects in its 
environment using a robotic arm using a 
camera mounted on the end, which we 
are approaching with machine learning.  
However, in order to learn hundreds of 
images will be needed, all with 
information on camera orientation and 
object grasping point.  So instead of 
taking a ton of pictures with a digital 
camera, the labeling of which would be 
tedious to say the least, we decided to 
train using simulated ray traced images, 
where the coordinate system is well 
known, then test on real images. 
 
  Although the final goal is to 
implement this work on a robotic arm 
with a variety of objects, that seemed 
beyond a reasonable scope for what 
could be accomplished in the time frame 
of a class project.  So I focused on the 
classification problem at the heart of the 
project  – can we train using only 
simulated images with the grasping point 
identified and get good results on real 
images? 
 
Related Work 
 
 
There are several factors at play in 
this approach.  For one, we are using just 
a single camera on the end of the arm 
and attempting to control a robotic arm 
in 3d space using a monocular image.  
Although we could use two successive 
frames in sequence and try to derive 
depth information from that, the images 
are not just taken from the top of a 

moving robot, but even worse from the 
end of an arm on top of it.  So, the 
odometry information on the separation 
of the two images is error prone, not to 
mention computation time and simple 
mathematical limits to bifocal depth 
resolution.  So instead once we start 
working on the robot we will be using 
work done earlier by Ashutosh on 
learning depth from monocular images. 
 
 
It also builds on work described in 
the High Speed Obstacle Avoidance 
using Monocular Vision and 
Reinforcement Learning paper, where 
they trained the algorithm first using 
simulated images to get basic driving 
skills, then trained further in the real 
world.  Their results using just simulated 
images showed that you can learn from 
simulated images, and the simulated 
images they used were pretty coarse 
open GL, worlds away from the most 
realistic scenes which can be constructed 
using a ray tracer. 
 
Simulated Images 
 
  Assuming that the more realistic an 
image the more applicable learning on 
that image will be to the real world, we 
decided to work with ray traced images 
instead of Open GL.  All work in this 
area was done using POV-Ray and open 
source extensions in MegaPov.  This 
also allows us to build objects using 
constructive solid geometry instead of 
having to model everything using 
polygons, but of course a ray tracer can 
use polygons too if we want, but for 
many objects CSG should work just fine.  
Furthermore CGS allows simple 
representation of things which in a 
polgonalized space would be very 
complex, such as a mug.  Thus we have 

object.  So, for the book the title is a 
random 10 character string, the height, 
width, and depth are also all randomized 
between certain parameters (i.e., the 
depth ranges from 0.5 ” to 1.5 ”) in 
addition to the random light position, 
camera location, etc.  Some example 
book images: 
 

 

 
 
For training each image has a 
corresponding grasp image, which is 
black except at the regions where the 
object should be held.  For the mug this 
is defined as the handle, for the book it is 
along the center of the spine.  To define 
grasp points spheres were used, although 
other primitives could be used as well.  
Here are some sample training images 
along with their corresponding target 
images: 
 

 

 

 

a great degree of flexibility in object 
creation. 
 
 
Initial work was done just in 
generating some sample images and 
balancing the degree of accuracy vs. 
render time.  The current implantation 
has mainly used a simulated image of a 
mug, but after observing performance on 
that I tested the approach on a book 
object as well.  Our current graphics take 
~30-60 seconds to render per image, 
allowing a thousand images to be 
rendered overnight.  However, based on 
experimental results, I believe in many 
cases 100-200 images will be sufficient. 
 
 
The method we are using to identify 
points of interest is a smattering of 
feature detectors, and relies on the object 
having some bit of texture.  So a bit of 
texture was added to the sample objects 
through a high frequency  “bozo ” texture, 
which has the effect of giving the object 
a little bit of noise.  This approach can 
be applied to any object, mitigating the 
need to define specific texture mappings. 
 
 
Each image is in a random position, 
with the main light casting a shadow at a 
random point along a general ceiling 
area.  The mug is always in the same 
location on a flat white tabletop, but is of 
a random color.  Some sample training 
images follow: 
 

 

 
  When designing the book object I 
decided to investigate the effect of 
randomizing the dimensions of the 

 
  Note in the third image no handle 
was visible, thus no part of the image is 
labeled as the target. 
 
Production of the labeled target 
images it entirely handled by the ray 

tracer, so there is never any need for 
handling labeling the target region of the 
images after they are produced. 
 
Learning 
 
  All learning was done using Matlab.  
Although far too slow for actual 
deployment on a robot, it is much easier 
to experiment with different methods 
and parameters there, and once those 
have been nailed down the program can 
be implemented in something faster. 
 
The approach for the learning was to 
 
break each 480x640 down into 48x64 
10x10 patches then apply a smattering of 
51 feature detectors, which I received 
from Ashutosh.  Each patch is then 
labeled as 1 if any part of it contains a 
grasp region.  Even so, since many 
images don ’t even contain the grasping 
region due to camera angle or occlusion, 
nearly 98 % of regions ended up labeled 
0 when training on the mug.  This 
significantly weights the negative 
examples, so to even out the dataset, and 
to speed convergence by reducing the 
extreme number of training examples 
(20 images yield 20 * 48 * 64 = 61440 
examples) negative examples are 
randomly trimmed until they are about 
equal.  I also experimented with 
different ratios, up to 3 negative 
examples to 1 positive, but found that 
somewhere between 1:1 and 3:2 seemed 
to yield the best results.  I also 
experimented with simply replicating the 
positive examples with some 
perturbation, but trimming the negative 
examples yielded better results and was 
also easier to parameterize. 
 
For the actual learning algorithm I 
 
tried both logistic regression, which I 
wrote, and kernalized SVM from 

http://asi.insa-
rouen.fr/~arakotom/toolbox/index.html.  
However, after spending a whole day on 
SVM attempting different kernels and 
different parameters, even when I got 
something that would converge if I 
changed the number of training 
examples it no longer converged.  
Besides, the SVM results were mediocre 
at best.  So I decided to focus on logistic 
regression instead. 
 
 
To fine tune the parameters, I 
experimented on the mug images.  I 
tested varying the number of training 
images from 20 up to 300, and varying 
the ratio of negative to positive images 
from 1:1 up to 3:1. 
 
Results 
 
 
I tested two objects in each category, 
one which should be easier to identify, 
and one which should be more difficult.  
For mugs I tested one dark blue mug 
which would stand out well against the 
white background and which had a 
handle somewhat similar to the handle in 
the training example  – large enough to 
fit the whole hand.  The second mug was 
white so it would be harder to resolve 
against the white background, and it had 
a handle which only fits one finger, very 
different from the handle in the training 
example.  For the book object, the first 
book is a C++ reference manual, very 
rectangular and with corners which 
should be easy to resolve.  The second 
book is a hardcover yearbook with a 
rounded spine and very dark to the 
corners are hard to resolve. 
 
  Before trimming the number of 
negative examples, training and testing 
on the training images led to 99.8% 
accuracy in classifying regions as handle 

or non handle overall, but only 73.6 % 
accuracy correctly classifying the handle 
regions.  This of course translated to 
even worse performance on the real test 
images.  After trimming, there was a 
significant improvement in grasp point 
detection, although the false positive rate 
also increased.  However, this is not an 
issue as long as the grasp point is 
detected consistently and false positives 
are spurious.  I found the best 
performance training on 80 examples 
and a negative to positive example ratio 
of 1:1 or 1.2:1.  Regions identified as 
grasp point regions are highlighted by 
having their red component inverted. 
(which shows as a red or blue highlight)  
Note the consistently excellent detection 
of the easier target, while detection of 
the second “challenge ” target fails in a 
few images (represented by image 6 in 
both sets) but is detected in most images. 
 

81 Training Images, 1.2:1 Ratio, Mug 

 

 

 

 

81 Training Images, 1.2:1 Ratio, Book 

 

 
 
These images are a representative 
cross section.  In the bottom right book 
image, note the spine is on the right side.  
This was the worst performance in terms 
of false positives, most were more 
similar to the third image.  Full results 
for these parameters are on the next page. 
 
Future Work 
 
  Continuing the project will involve 
producing more simulated objects, as 
well as experimenting with using 
multiple simulated objects for one class 
of objects (i.e., having several models of 
a mug instead of just one).  Also, 
orientation of the robotic pincher needs 
to be incorporated as well, and then it 
needs to be implemented in a real-time 
language instead of Matlab. 

Full Mug Results 81 Images 1.2:1 Ratio 
 

 

 
Full Book Results 81 Images 1.2:1 Ratio 
 

 

