Learning techniques for Computer Aided Diagnosis in Chest 
Radiography 
 

Arpit Aggarwal (SU # 05375755) 

Course CS229: Final Write-up 

 

 
Introduction 
 
Lung  nodule  detection  in  chest  radiographs  is  an  important  area  for  Computer  Aided  Diagnosis  (CAD) 
primarily because lung cancer still claims over one million deaths every year. Early detection of the disease 
is critical but the fact remains that only 20% [1] of cases are detected in the first phase.  
 
Radiologists can miss up to 30% of lung nodules (which may develop into cancer) in chest radiographs due 
to  the  background  anatomy  of  the  lungs  which  can  camouflage  the  nodules.  CAD  helps  radiologists  by 
performing  preprocessing  of  the  images  and  suggesting  the most  likely  locations  for nodules. Detection of 
lung nodules proceeds through techniques for suppressing the background structures in lungs which include 
the  blood  vessels,  ribs  and  the  bronchi.  The  resulting  images  provide  chest  structures  which  make  good 
candidates  for  nodules  and  can  be  further  classified  on  the  basis  of  features  like  size,  contrast  and  shapes. 
Simple  rule  based  classifications  on  such  features  tend  to  produce  a  lot  of  false  positives.  In  this  project  I 
investigate a supervised  learning  technique  to come up with non-trivial secondary classifiers  for separating 
nodules from vessels, bifurcations, crossings and other background structures. 
 
Input Data 
 
The  input  data  is  a  series  of  axial  radiographs  from  different  patients.  The  radiographs  are  512  x  512 
grayscale  images with  intensities  in Hounsfield units (HU). The data from  these slices can be concatenated 
in  an  array  to  get  a  3D  array  of  voxels.  I  have  used  a  set  of  304  radiographs  from  a  single  patient  for 
training. The size of the voxels in the dataset is 0.683594 x 0.683594 x 1.0 mm3.  
 

 

Figure 1 – Shows a single input axial radiograph of a lung with an actual nodule (labeled true positive - 
green circle) and one false positive (red circle). 

 
Also  a  set  of  candidate  locations  for  nodules  (rough  center  points  of  the  structures)  found  by  the  pre-
processing  (using  the first classifier) of  the  images  is provided. These have been correctly  labeled as either 

 

a nodule (true positive of the first classifier) or not (a false positive of the same classifier). They are used to 
train  the  secondary  classifier.  The  single  patient  data-set  had  1000  such  locations,  out  of  which  82  were 
labeled as true positive and the rest as false positives. 
   
Features 
 
Given  the  candidate  location,  a  trivial  set  of  features  would  be  to  take  the  intensities  of  the  voxels  or  the 
average  intensity  of  a  block  of  voxels  about  the  point  of  interest.  But  this  would  result  in  a  high 
dimensional feature space and also not exploit the knowledge that one already possesses about the nodules. 
At the same time such features would be susceptible to rotation and scale variance. 
 
One  important  heuristic  which  can  be  used  to  distinguish  nodules  from  other  structures  is  that  they  are 
essentially spherical where as other structures like vessels, ribs or bronchi are tubular. Following are the set 
of features that I analyzed to model this distinction –  
 
Marching Cubes with visibility test 
 
 

Figure 2: Surface rendering of a Bifurcation 
using Marching Cubes. 

Figure 3: Surface rendering of a Lung Nodule using 
Marching Cubes. 

 
 
To represent  the shape of  the structure  through  the features, I used  the distances of points on  the surface of 
the  structures  from  their  center  points  (provided  as  input).  To  find  the  surface  I  ran  the  Marching  cubes 
algorithm  to  determine  the  triangles  making  up  iso-surface.  Details  of  the  algorithm  can  be  found  in  [2]. 

 

For  each  triangle  visible  from  the  center  point  the  distance  to  its  centroid  is  calculated. A  histogram  of  all 
the distances normalized by  their mean  is  found out. Each bin  in  the histogram  is  taken as a  feature for  the 
classifier. Different  numbers of  features were  tried out  as  a  trade  off  between  high bias  and  computational 
complexity. Finally 30 such features were used to define the classifier.   
 
This  set  of  features  resulted  in  average  performance  on  the  training  set  (high  bias)  indicating  that  a  better 
set of features was required.  
 
Lantern Transform with rays in a single direction 
 
The  marching  cubes  algorithm  had  the  problem  of  carrying  over  into  surrounding  structures  while 
calculating  the  surface  of  a  particular  structure.  This  skewed  the  distance  histograms.  Thus,  I  decided  to 
sample  the  surface  directly.  For  this  3D  rays  were  cast  out  from  the  center  point  over  equally  spaced 
directions  (calculated  by  distributing  a  set  of  points  uniformly  over  a  unit  sphere)  and  their  length  when 
they hit a surface (sudden drop in intensities) was calculated. A histogram of the various distances was then 
plotted. Each bin in this histogram represented a feature. 
 
Lantern Transform with a pair of anti-parallel rays 
 

Figure 4: Sampled surface of a 
Bifurcation 

Figure 5: Sampled surface of a 
Nodule 

 
Further,  I  employed  the  correlation  between  rays  that  are  anti-parallel  to  each  other.  So  rays were  cast out 
in  opposite  directions  and  the  pairs  of  distances  were  used  for  the  histograms.  These  gave  a  better 
indication  of  the  symmetric  nature  of  the  structure.  The  resulting  2D  histogram  had  n2  bins  (n  bins 
corresponding to distance in 1 direction) and since the histograms formed a symmetric matrix only half the 
bin counts (n2/2) were used as features. I chose a set of 200 features for classification.  
 

 

The  above  features were made  scale  invariant  by  normalizing  the  distances. Normalization was  done with 
the mean of the distances for each histogram. 
  
Classifier & Results 
 
Since  this  is  a binary  classification  problem, Logistic  linear  regression was  used  to  learn  a  linear  classifier 
with  a  bias.  The  classifier  had  31  parameters  for  the  first  feature  set  and  201  when  training  using  the 
second. Batch  gradient  ascent was  used  to maximize  the  log-likelihood  and  the  learning  rate was  kept  at  a 
constant value of .01 because convergence can be achieved for a fixed value for alpha. 
 
Following are the classification results achieved on the test and training set for both classifiers. 
 

Lantern Transform 

Marching Cubes 

 

 

 

Training Set 

Test Set 

 

Training Set 

Test Set 

Sensitivity 
(True Positive 
Ratio) 
Specificity 
(True 
Negative 
Ratio) 

Overall 
Accuracy 

48.15 

23.08 

99.89 

97.78 

95.67 

88.35 

Sensitivity 
(True Positive 
Ratio) 
Specificity 
(True 
Negative 
Ratio) 

Overall 
Accuracy 

37.18 

23.08 

96.55 

93.25 

91.17 

84.31 

 
Even  though  the  overall  accuracy  was  found  to  be  pretty  good,  binary  classifiers  which  have  a  varied 
distribution in the two classes of the training data are better evaluated using ROC curves. 
  

 
Figure 6: Shows the ROC curves for the two feature sets plotted by varying the threshold value of the 
classifier  

 
From  the  figure,  one  realizes  that  Lantern  Transform  results  in  a  better  classifier  as  it  has  a  larger  area 
under  the  ROC.  Depending  on  the  context  and  the  cost  associated  with  the  two  classes  (nodule  and  non-
nodule)  one  can  choose  a  threshold  value  along  the  curve.  For  certain  values  the  Visibility  March 
outperforms  the Lantern Transform and  is  thus used  in  that context. The combined performance  is  then  the 
convex  hull  of  the  two  curves.  In  our  case  since  high  sensitivity  is  critical  as  we  don’t  want  to  drop  any 
actual nodules, the lantern transform with a threshold value of -5.3 can be chosen. This ensures a sensitivity 
value of 1 and at the same time cuts down 25% of the false positives. 
 
Bayesian Logistic  regression with MAP  estimate was  also  tried  as  a  classifier  but  expectedly  did  not  offer 
significantly better performance as the earlier classifier did not suffer from the problem of over fitting. 
 
Testing 
 
Testing was done on  a  set of  100  candidate  locations which had 12 nodules  and 88 other  structures. These 
radiographs  belonged  to  a  patient  different  from  the  one  on  which  the  training  was  performed.  Since  the 
real  test of  the  classifier  is  to  correctly  identify nodules  in different  patients,  cross validation was not used 
while learning/evaluating the classifier on the two sets of radiographs. 
 
Future work 
 
Features  could  be  further  improved  to  get  better  classification.  In  particular  in  the marching  cubes  feature, 
the distances could be weighted by  the area of  the  triangles. Also  the angle at which  the 3D ray  is  incident 
on to the surface of the structure could be considered to form a feature. 
 
A  better  classifier  could  be  built  by  using  a  combination  of  some  of  the  above  features  instead  of  using 
them alone. Also ensemble learning could be used to get better results. 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
I  want  to  acknowledge  the  valuable  inputs  given  by  Asst.  Prof.  David  Paik,  Radiology  Department, 
Stanford  School  of  Medicine,  during  the  course  of  this  project.  He  also  provided  the  training  and  test 
radiographs that were essential for the viability of the project.   
 
References: 
 

1.  Ellis J. R. C., Gleeson F. V., Lung cancer screening, The British Journal of Radiology, 74 (2001), 478–485 
2.  Lorensen  W.  E.,  Cline  H.  E,  Marching  Cubes:  A  High  Resolution  3D  Surface  construction  algorithm, 
Computer Graphics, Volume 21, Number 4, July 1987.  
3.  Doi K.,  et  al., Computer-aided  diagnosis  in  radiology:  potential  and  pitfalls,  European  Journal  of Radiology 
31 (1997) 97–109 

 
 

