Learning To Pick Up a Novel Object 

Chioma Osondu and Justin Kearns
Chioma Osondu and Justin Kearns    
Chioma Osondu and Justin Kearns
Chioma Osondu and Justin Kearns

       

    

 
1. Abstract 
In  order  for  an  autonomous  robot  to  successfully 
function  in a natural environment  it needs  to be able 
to  able  to  interact  with  objects  it  has  never  seen 
before. Specifically  it needs  to be able  to manipulate 
objects  in  the  environment  that  it  has  no  prior 
knowledge  of.  The  robot  must  not  only  be  able  to 
cope with  uncertainty  in  the  shape  of  the  object,  but 
also  with  uncertainty  in  the  position  and  orientation 
of  the  object.  This  problem  is  one  that  can  be 
approached  with  machine  learning  techniques.  Our 
project is to teach a robot arm to pick up items it has 
never  seen  before.  We  will  attempt  this  problem 
mainly with a supervised learning approach. We will 
train  the  arm  by  showing  it  a  variety  of  objects.  It 
will  use  monocular  vision  to  extract  features  of  the 
object and we will show it how  to pick up  the object 
up. Given  this  training  set,  it will  learn  the  best way 
to pick up objects it has never seen before.  
Other  work  in  this  area  includes  using  uncalibrated 
stereovision  to  pick  up  an  uncertain  object  at 
Cambridge University 
 
2.  Learning 
This was done using linear regression. 
  
2.1 Data Collection 
We started off with images of 5 objects.  In this case, 
markers  of  different  colors  and  slightly  different 
shapes.    For  each  marker,  we  had  5  different 
orientations.    For  each  orientation,  we  had  10 
pictures  taken  from  different  positions,  as  the  robot 
arm  approached  the marker.    This  process  yielded  a 
total  of  250  images  for  training  purposes.        In 
addition  to  collecting  images,  the  robot  joint  angles, 
operational  coordinates  and  motor  encoder  values, 
corresponding  to  each  image,  were  saved  to  files 
(one  file  per  image.)    Each  image  was  320  x  240 
pixels in size (i.e. along the x-axis and y-axis.) 
 
2.2 Initial Feature Selection 
Our  initial challenge  in getting  the  robot arm  to pick 
up  unknown  objects  was  to  determine  what  features 

to  use.    Since  as  mentioned  earlier,  we  had  images 
and  the  corresponding  robot  position  when  the 
image  was  taken  as  well  as  the  final  position  of  the 
robot  in  the  gripping  position,  we  needed  to 
determine the relationship between these images and 
the  final  orientation  of  the  end-effector  when  the 
object was gripped.   
 
The  first  attempt  at  feature  extraction  was  done 
through  a  feature  vector  program  written  by 
Ashutosh  Saxena.    The  program  divides  an  image 
into  patches  of  equal  sizes  and  returns  17  attributes 
for  each  patch  attained  by  using  various  filters  (the 
number  of  patches  could  be  modified  to  suit 
different  training  needs.)    After  careful  inspection, 
we  found  that  the  optimal  way  of  dividing  up  the 
image was  to have 18 divisions along  the x-axis and 
14 along the y-axis.  This guarantees that at least one 
edge of the object would be captured by one of the 9 
patches,  which  we  would  be  used  in  the  next  phase 
of the computation. 
 
We chose to use the 8 patches surrounding the center 
of  the object, as well as  the center patch  in a  tic-tac-
toe  board  configuration.    This  gave  the  total  of  9 
patches mentioned above.  Determining the center of 
each  object  was  done  in  following  way;  first,  the 
image  is  converted  to  grayscale  and  then  threshold 
values  are  used  to  separate  the  background  (which 
was  white)  from  the  object.    Second,  given  the 
points above  the  threshold, the largest of  the clusters 
found in the image is noted.  Finally, the midpoint in 
the x and y direction are used to determine the image 
center. 
 
2.2.1 Training 
For  all  of  the  learning  described  below,  we  used 
linear  regression.    We  also  added  a  bias  column  of 
all  1’s  to  the  training  matrix  in  each  of  the  attempts 
described  below.    For  some  of  the  tests,  we 
introduced  a  regularization  parameter,  lambda  with 
values  ranging  from  .01  to  .005.    This  did  not 
significantly  improve  the  results.    In  fact,  most  of 
the  time,  the  results  were  identical  to  the  results 

observed with  the  normal  linear  regression  in  closed 
form,  so  we  reverted  back  to  linear  regression 
without  regularization.    200  out  of  the  250  images 
were used for training and the remainder was used as 
the  test  set.    The  chi-squared  error  was  used  to 
analyze  effectiveness/accuracy  of  our  model;  so  all 
the  errors  reported  below  are  chi-squared  error 
values with formula (Y is actual orientation):   
sum((Y - predictedY)^2) / sum((Y - mean(Y) )^2 ) 

 
2.2.1.1 Training (Take 1) 
The  17  attributes  corresponding  to  each  of  the  9 
patches were used as a row in the training matrix.  In 
the 
target  matrix,  each  group  of  9 
rows, 
corresponding  to  9  patches  of  the  same  image, 
would  have  identical  values.    In  addition  to  these, 
each  of  the  10  images  that  were  captured  while 
moving to the final position was also associated with 
1  outcome,  i.e.  the  final  orientation  of  the  end-
effector.    This  meant  that  90  rows  in  the  target 
vector had identical values.  This proved to be a very 
bad approach  to  the problem as  the both  the  training 
and test errors were very high.  
 
2.2.1.2 Training (Take 2) 
The  training matrix  was  unchanged,  but  we  decided 
to  look  at  our  target  vector  differently.    Instead  of 
having  each  image  group  of  10  images  taken  en 
route  to  the  final  position  associated  with  the  same 
value  in  the  target  vector,  we  used  the  difference 
between  the  gamma  (the  orientation  of  the  wrist 
joint)  at  the  time  the  image  was  taken  and  the  final 
gamma.    For  testing,  this  gamma  difference  value 
tells us  how much  to  increase  or  decrease  gamma  to 
match  the  object  orientation.    This  approach  was 
minimally better than the previous approach. 
We  came  to  the  conclusion  that  drastic  changes  had 
to  be  made  to  our  training  model.     Many  of  the  17 
attributes  were  not  informative  with  regard  to  our 
problem,  so we decided  to concentrate only on  the 6 
edge  filters  from  the  feature  vector;  ignoring  the 
other  attributes  that  deal  with  texture,  et  cetera.  
Also,  having  9  rows  corresponding  to  the  same 
output  value  seemed  inappropriate  because  it  was 
unintuitive. 
 
2.2.1.3 Training (Take 3) 
The training matrix was set up in such way that the 6 
edges  corresponding  to  each  of  the  9  patches 
associated  with  one  image  were  stored  in  1  row.  
Therefore,  there  was  1  row  per  image  and  54 
attributes  per  row.      This  proved  to  be  a  better 
model,  with  significantly  better  train  than  test  error.  
This also was a case of over-fitting.   To  improve  the 

test  error, we  decreased  the  number  of  features,  first 
by  taking  various  combinations  of  patches,  such  as 
the  4  corners  and  center  of  our  tic-tac-toe  board  as 
well as other combinations of more and less patches.  
As  expected,  this  improved  the  test  errors  but  had 
the adverse effect of increasing the training error.   
 
2.2.1.4 Training (Take 4) 
This  approach,  which  seemed  to  be  the  winning 
approach,  uses  a  single  highly  informative  patch.  
The  patch  needed  to  have  the  most  information 
about  the  orientation  of  the  object.    To  select  this 
patch  we  used  different  heuristics,  for  example,  for 
each  patch,  we  found  the  average  of  its  edge  scores 
and  divided  each  edge  score  by  the  average.    The 
patch containing the edge with the highest value was 
used  as  the  best  patch.    The  above  heuristic  used  in 
isolation did not select the most informative patch.   
 

 
 

 

 
Figure 1. The object the robot is supposed to grasp is seen 
in  the  earlier  picture.    The  estimated  center  of  the  object 
and  the  9  patches  around  the  center  that  are  used  in  the 
heuristic computation below. 
 
The  heuristic  that  achieved  the  best  results  selected 
the  best  patch  by  combining  the  process  described 
above with  the  following;  the  edge  to  average  ratios 
computed  above  were  summed  along  the  edges  for 
each of the 9 patches, i.e. the sum of all edge 1 ratios 
in  the  9  patches  and  edge  2  ratios,  etc.    We 
considered  the  two  greatest  scores  as  the  two  best 

orientation value could be misleading.  For example, 
in  the  case  of  a  white  pen  with  a  red  cap,  the  HSV 
would  only  pick  up  the  red  cap  and  the  orientation 
angle  would  be  large  even  if  the  cap  angle  was  not, 
because of the small area.   
 

edges.    Then  for  both  of  the  edges,  whichever  edge 
was  greatest  in  the  most  patches,  we  considered  the 
dominant  edge. 
  The  patch  having 
the  most 
difference  between  the  dominant  edge  and  the 
second best edge was then selected as the best patch.  
This  heuristic  was  further  reinforced  by  visual 
inspection.  
Using  this  patch, we  tried  all  possible  subsets  of  the 
6  edges  and  found  that  using  2  edges  generated  the 
lowest  test  error  of  0.6926  with  a  training  error  of 
0.7316. While  the  test  error, was  significantly  better 
than  before,  it  was  still  not  good  enough  to  use  in 
practice.    It  was  generally  correct  in  regard  to 
following  the  shape  of  the  curve,  but  the magnitude 
was much smaller as can be seen in the graph below. 

 
Figure  3.  Saturation  channel  of  object with  estimated  end 
points.  The object used here is a remote control. 
 
To  fix  the  orientation magnitude  problem, we  added 
the  area  that we  analyzed  as  a  feature  to  enable  it  to 
learn  when  to  give  more  and  less  weight  to  the 
magnitude  of  the  value.    It  also  seemed  logical  that 
the  position  of  the  camera  when  the  picture  was 
taken  would  affect  the  analysis,  so  the  difference  in 
the camera and object position as well as the pitch of 
the camera were included.   
 
We  tried  all  subsets  of  the  4  features  and  found  the 
pitch  did  not  help,  so  we  narrowed  it  down  to  the  3 
features:  heuristic  angle,  camera  to  object  distance, 
and  area  of  the  object  analyzed.    These  3  features 
generated  the  best  test  error,  at  that  point  in  the 
project, of 0.372.   

 
Figure  4.  The  actual  end-effector  orientation  compared 
with  the  predicted  end  effector  position  using  the  features 
described above on the test data. 

 

 
Figure  2.  The  actual  end-effector  orientation  compared 
with  the  predicted  end-effector  position  (using  2  edges  as 
described above) on the test data. 
 
 
2.3 Alternate Feature Selection 
We  decided  to  start  from  scratch  on  our  own 
features.    A  lot  of  the  collected  images  had  bad 
shadows, making it difficult to determine the ends of 
the  object  from  the  threshold  value.    We  used  the 
saturation  channel  of  HSV,  which  generally 
eliminated  the  background  and  returned  only  parts 
(non-white)  of  the  object.    We  used  the  method 
described  earlier  to  estimate  the  ends  of  the  object 
based  on  the  position  of  the  largest  cluster.    With 
these points, we needed to determine the coordinates 
of  the  object  ends.    We  knew  an  end  of  the  object 
was  either  in  the  top  left  or  bottom  left,  so  we 
checked  the  region  in  the  top  left  and  if  part  of  the 
object  was  there,  the  object  was  oriented  top  left  to 
bottom  right.    If  it  was  not,  then  it  was  oriented 
bottom left to top right.   
The object orientation was determined by finding the 
angle  between  the  vector  pointing  in  the Y  direction 
from the object center and the vector from the center 
of  the  object  to  the  end  point.    This  angle  alone  did 
not seem  to be enough because  the magnitude or  the 

edges with the area, angle of orientation and distance 
between the camera and the object as features.  
  
 
 
 
        1 

 

 

Figure 6. The 4 edge filters that produced the best test and 
training error. 
 
Randomly  selected  rows  of  the  entire  feature matrix 
were  used  as  training  data  and  the  remainder  was 
used  for  testing.    Of  the  10  images  for  each  object 
orientation,  one  image  was  randomly  selected  for 
test and the other 9 were used for training. 

 
Figure  7.  The  actual  end-effector  orientation  compared 
with  the  predicted  end  effector  position  using  the  edges 
from  Figure  6  combined  with  the  other  three  features 
mentioned above.  This is on training data. 
 

 

 
Figure  8.  The  actual  end-effector  orientation  compared 
with  the  predicted  end  effector  position  using  the  edges 
from  Figure  6  combined  with  the  other  three  features 
mentioned above.  This is on the test data. 
 
As can be  seen  from  the  figures above, getting more 
data  proved  to  be  a  worthwhile  decision.    The 
observed  test  error  was  0.24  and  the  train  error  was 

 
Figure  5.  The  actual  end-effector  orientation  compared 
with  the  predicted  end  effector  position  using  the  features 
described above on the training data. 
 
The test error was good compared  to previous cases, 
but  looking  at  the  graph  of  actual  output  vs. 
predicted output, the magnitude and sign were better 
matches  compared  to  the  previous  graph,  but  it  did 
not fit the curve of the graph.   
 
Since  the  previous  features  in  the  other  training 
experiments  fit  the  curve  better,  we  combined  the 
two sets of features, so that the number of features in 
the  training  matrix  was  5.    Therefore,  the  total 
number  of  columns  in  the  training  matrix  was  6, 
including  the  bias  column.    The  test  error  here  was 
0.29. 
We  tried  training  and  testing  on  other  parts  of  our 
250  images  using  these  features  and  found  that  our 
test error was between 0.5 and 0.6, which was worse 
than  previously  observed.    This  can  be  attributed  to 
biasing  our  data  toward  the  pens  we  trained  on,  so 
we mixed up our data so  that we  trained on all  types 
of  pens  and  tested  on  all  types  of  pens,  which 
resulted  in  test  errors  of  about  0.54.    However,  the 
graph of predicted vs. actual was more promising, so 
we  tried  out  the  predicted  values  on  the  robot.    The 
results  of 
the  experiments  did  not  meet  our 
standards. 
 
2.3.1  Training (Final Take) 
Since  the  best  results  described  above  were  not 
much  better  than  random  data  selection,  we  decided 
to  collect  more  data.    This  time  the  selection  of 
objects  included  a  variety  of  long  thin  objects.    The 
lighting was also better this time around as there was 
a  light  source  directly  above  the  robot,  eliminating 
most  of  the  shadow.   The  total  number  of  images  in 
the collection grew  to 650.   We ran similar  tests and 
found  this  time,  that  it  was  more  fitting  to  use  4 

0.37, mostly from magnitude misses. While there are 
some  magnitude  misses,  the  robustness  of  the 
robot’s  gripper  allows  it  to  grasp  objects  with 
orientation values within range. 
 
2.4 Testing 
The  robot  takes  a  picture  of  an  object and writes  the 
image  to  one  file,  while  the  corresponding  joint 
angles,  operational  coordinates,  and  motor  encoder 
values  are  written  to  a  separate  file.    This  image  is 
then analyzed and an end-effector orientation (which 
is  equivalent  to  a  single  target  value)  is  returned 
using  the processes described above. Since all of  the 
analysis  and  training  was  done  in  Matlab,  to  fully 
automate  the  robot  motion,  we  needed  to  integrate 
the C++ code and  the Matlab code.   To  this end,  the 
Matlab  code  was  compiled 
into  a  standalone 
executable.      A  call  was  then  made  from  the  C++ 
code  to  the Matlab  executable  after  the  files  needed 
for analysis were generated.   The Matlab executable 
would  output  a  file  containing  the  predicted  gamma 
difference  value  (which  would  then  be  used  to 
generate the final end-effector orientation) as well as 
the  object  center.    The  object  center  was  needed  to 
compute  the  values  of  some  of  the  other  robot 
operational coordinates.  We use the camera intrinsic 
and fixed Z plane of the table to compute the objects 
location  in  the  robot’s  coordinate  system  and  move 
to  that  position  with  the  learned  gamma  value.   We 
make  3  assessments  of  the  object  location  from 
different  positions  and  choose  the  median.    If  the 
robot grips the object, it puts it in a box, otherwise it 
returns to the start position and tries again.  Since the 
Z  plane  was  fixed,  the most  important  coordinate  to 
facilitate  the  desired  outcome  was  the  orientation  of 
the  gripper.    The  gripper  had  to  be  turned  the  right 
way  for  the  robot  to  successfully  pick  up  the  object 
in its view. 
 
2.5 Experimental Results 
We  tested  the  robot  with  5  objects  in  arbitrary 
orientations that were not included in its training set, 
3  pens  of  various  color  and  shape,  1  eraser,  and  1 
coiled  USB  cable.    The  robot  correctly  guessed  the 
sign  of  the  orientation  on  all  attempts  where  the 
object was clearly oriented  in 1 direction.   When  the 
object  was  oriented  straight  up,  the  robot  guessed  a 
small  orientation  in  either  direction.    The  match  of 
the  magnitude  of  the  robot’s  orientation  was  not 
exact,  but  it was  always  in  a  range  close  enough  for 
the  robot  to  get  the  objects  in  its  gripper  on  every 
attempt  it  made,  with  1  exception  on  the  coil  of 
wires  in  a  crescent  orientation  in  which  the  robot 

arm  was  oriented  correctly,  but  estimated  the  center 
poorly.  
 

 
       
Figure  9.  The  harmonic  arm  in  the  start  configuration, 
while  analyzing  the  object  (left).    The  harmonic  arm  in 
the  final  position,  gripping  the  object  with  its  end-
effector,  using  the  correct  orientation  to  ensure  that  the 
object can be picked up. 
 
3.  Conclusions 
Initially,  it  seemed  highly  unlikely  that  a  linear 
classifier would  be  successful  at  this  task.   This was 
because.  It was  hard  to  imagine  a  linear  relationship 
between  the  orientation  of  the  end-effector  and  the 
features,  which  were  used  during  the  training.    Our 
initial  attempts  were  discouraging  because  even 
though  we  were  able  to  drive  the  training  error 
down,  the  test  error  only  increased.   After  extensive 
analysis  of  our  initial  features  and  target  variables, 
we were able to lower the test error, even though the 
values would not be good enough, in practice. 
This  led  to  the  creation  of  an  unrelated  set  of 
features as described earlier. 
The major breakthrough here was combining the two 
sets  of  features  giving  us  values  for  the  orientation 
of  the  end-effector,  which  could  actually  be  used 
with an amazing degree of success in practice. 
 
Acknowledgements 
Ashutosh  Saxena  was  an  invaluable  resource  and 
mentor  throughout  the  project  and  we  would  like  to 
say  a  special  thanks  to  him.    Also,  many  thanks  to 
Jimmy  Zhang  and  Anya  Petrovskaya  for  help  with 
the Harmonic Robot Arm. 
 
References 
1. Saxena, Ashutosh, Chung, Sung H., & Ng, 
Andrew (2005). Learning Depth from Single 
Monocular Images. 
  
 
 
 

