 
Anthony S. Guerrero (SCPD n4361176) 
CS229 Class Project 
12/15/2005 
 

Identification of heterozygous point mutation events in DNA sequencing chromatograms. 

 
Introduction. 
 
The recent discovery of activating somatic mutations in cancer that correlate with phenotypes such as drug responsiveness, has 
generated renewed interest in the sequencing of genomes of tumor samples and cancer cancer cell lines with the goal of identifying the 
set of mutations that produce those phenotypes [1].  The two most popular strategies for discovering these events are array CGH [2], 
and direct sequencing of tumor samples and cells at specific loci of genes suspected a priori to be involved in tumor proliferation and 
survival.  The latter technique involves using PCR amplification of the loci of interest and standard capillary electrophoresis DNA 
sequencing to generate chromatograms and sequences which are then compared to a reference normal sequence to reveal mutations.  
The detection of homozygous events is relatively straightforward, but the identification of heterozygous point events is problematic.  
The process of detecting heterozygous events involves detecting "peaks within peaks" of chromatogram waveforms and is plagued by 
a variety of artifacts in these signals which can potentially generate false positives.  Proposed herein is a detection algorithm based on 
a classifier which distinguishes candidate "peaks within peaks" that are heterozygous point mutations from those that are false 
positives based on statistics about the candidate event and representation of these artifacts as interval-scale input variables to a 
machine learning algorithm. 
 
Background. 
Standard DNA sequencing technology using capillary eletrophoresis produces a chromatogram and a nucleotide sequence called by a 
base caller algorithm (Fig 1.). 
 

Fig 1:  

 

 
The output of the sequencer and basecaller is a binary file containing the four raw electrophoresis curves (one for each base G,C,A and 
T), a vector indicating the locations within the curves at which the bases were called (shown graphically in figure 1 as vertical dashed 
white lines), and a vector of the  “call quality” [4 ] at each base (an integer from 0 to 100, equal to -10 * [log probability of error in the 
base call], according to the base caller algorithm). 
 
Heterozygous point mutations manifest as peaks within peaks (Fig 2.) but are easily confused with a variety of artifacts including 
background noise (Fig 3.), cross-talk, dye-blobs (Fig 4.), end run noise (Fig 5.). 
 

Fig 2. True Heterozygous Event. 

 

 

  

Fig 3. Background Noise, Non-events. 

 

 

Fig 4. Dye Blob. Non-event. 

   
Fig 5. End Run Noise, Non-events. 

 

 
Classification of Training Data: 
One existing successful approach to identifying these events relies on the anti-correlation of the waveform of interest with respect to a 
waveform averaged from a pool of  ‘wild-type ’ or nor mal samples [3].  One embodiment of this approach is used by a program called 
“Mutation Surveyor ™
to supply the training data for the classifier described here. 
”, the output of which was used 
 
Attributes: 
Proposed here is an algorithm which does not rely on such a pool of normal samples, and instead classifies events for a single 
chromatogram in isolation, solely by the local attributes of the chromatogram.  The input to the classification algorithm is generated 
by locating in the chromatogram, in each channel, local-maxima that do not correspond to a called base at that position (non-call 
peaks).  This produces four (possibly empty) sets of positions MA = {a1,..aA, A=number of non-call local maxima}, MG = {g1,..gG}, 
MC = {c1,..cC}, MT = {t1,..tT}.  The peaks in these peak sets represent the candidates for classification.  A classification of  ‘positive ’ 
constitutes the event detector. 
 
The first and probably most important input variable for each peak is some measure of the magnitude of the local maxima with respect 
to its neighborhood.  For each candidate peak, its full width half maximum,  “FWHM ” normalized by the b ase calling pitch and its 
height compared to the average call peaks of the same channel  “peakratio ” (Fig 6) in some neighborhood  (+/- 20 bases) are calculated.  
Notice that the FWHM attribute was chosen as it appears that it may be useful for both rejecting noise peaks (with small width) and 
rejecting  “dye-blobs” (with large peak widths).   
 

 
Also calculated for each peak is the proportional displacement of the peak with respect to its closest call peak normalized by the base 
calling pitch in the neighborhood,  “posdisp ” (Fig 7 .).  This attribute should help to distinguish noise peaks as peaks with a larger 
posdisp are increasingly likely to be noise as they do not spatially coincide with the most proximal base. 
 

 Fig 6. Peak Ratio = g/<G> 

 Fig 7. Proportional Displacement, 2d/D 

 
For the purposes of eliminating potential false positives caused by regions of poor signal to noise ratio, the average local call quality in 
the neighborhood, not including the base over the peak of interest, is included as an attribute,  “aveq ual”, as is the specific call quality 
of the base over the peak of interest,  “qual”.  We  would expect the avequal attribute to be proportionally related to the likelihood of a 
positive (good surrounding base call quality implies that peak of interest is not likely to be noise).  The specific call quality of the base 
over the peak of interest, qual, we would expect to relate inversely with the likelihood of a true positive (poor quality at the call over 
the peak implies a large significant underlying peak and likely positive). 
 
Inspection of typical chromatograms demonstrates the ubiquitous presence of unusually high levels of noise at both the beginning and 
 above.  In anticipation of the fact that avequal, which will sample the left and right 
end of the waveform, referred to as  ‘end run noise ’
neighborhood of a peak, might not be an accurate estimate of whether or not the peak of interest is near the extremes of the waveform, 
two additional attributes,  “maxqual” and  “minqual”,
 which represent the maximum and minimum of the two averages produced by 
only sampling from right and left of the peak.  The attribute minqual might be expected to serve as a good indicator of whether a 
particular candidate peak is near the end of the waveform as this would produce a low left or right flanking average base call quality. 
 
Finally, a measure of how the peak in question compares to the distribution of other background peaks in the same channel (which 
should be mostly noise) is calculated the Z-score of the peak in question with respect to the average and standard deviation of all the 
background peaks in the same channel.  This attribute is called  “lzscore ”. 

 
In summary, the attributes are thus: peakratio,  lzscore, FWHM, posdisp, qual,  avequal, maxqual and minqual. 
 
Data Collection: 
A program was written to parse chromatograms to yield the attributes mentioned above.  The set of attributes were collected for 255 
heterozygous point mutations detected in 202 chromatograms by Mutation Surveyor ™.  These 256 data poin ts represent the 
‘positives ’ of the training data set.  The set of  ‘ negatives ’ were gathered by processing 11 chromatog rams classified by Mutation 
Surveyor ™ as  ‘wild-type ’ (meaning they should have 
no events) and collecting attributes for all non-call peaks in the 11 wild-type 
chromatograms.  This yielded 21,101  ‘negative ’ data  points as the number of non-event background peaks vastly outnumbers the 
number of heterozygous mutation event peaks. 
 
Training: 
Visual inspection of the dimension pair-wise plot of a hypercube including a 10% margin around the hypercube containing all the 
‘positive ’ data (Fig. 8) shows that the data is not
 trivially separable by any pair of dimensions, although peakratio,  “lzscore ” and the 
neighborhood quality metrics show promise.  A linear and radial kernel SVM [6], logistic regression and a regression tree model 
(pruned by 10 fold cross validation and a  “1-SE ” ru le for the optimal tree [5]) were trained on randomly sampled subsets of the 
training data of increasing size for ten iterations. Their total error, false positive and false negative rates averaged for the ten iterations 
on each training data set size were tabulated (Fig. 9). 

 
The SVM and logistic regression models seem to not improve substantially with larger training data set sizes, suggesting an inherent 
bias problem and possible poor lack of fit to the classification problem.  The regression tree model seemed to improve steadily on all 
error rates, suggesting that the model may converge further for larger training data sets and seems to converge to a lower general error 
rate and, more importantly, a lower false negative rate when trained on all the data.  One might imagine a radial kernel SVM to be 
capable of recapitulating quite accurately the decision boundary of a regression tree, so the fact that the regression tree exceeds the 
performance of the radial kernel SVM for a large enough data set size is a bit surprising.  This is suggestive of some possible  ‘sharp 
angles ’ or high-dimensional corners in the optimal  decision boundary.  These could possibly be mirroring fixed thresholds inherent in 
the Mutation Surveyor ™ software used to supply the 
training data. 
 
The optimal pruned tree (Fig. 10) shows that a majority of the positives classify by the lzscore, minqual and peakratio and a majority 
of the negatives classify by lzscore and peakratio.   
 

Fig 9 

Fig 10 

 

Improvements: 
Manual inspection of some of the most frequently misclassified true positives shows that even when the background peak might be 
weak, often the foreground peak is measurably reduced in amplitude in the presence of a heterozygous event.  This suggests that one 
might add an additional parameter to measure how attenuated the foreground peak is compared to the neighboring call-peaks of the 
same channel.  Usually, although not always, chromatogram readouts come in pairs, one chromatogram produced from a PCR reaction 
on the forward strand of DNA and one independently produced from a PCR reaction on the reverse strand.  Exploiting the 
corroboration expected between forward and reverse strand readouts would allow one to train a machine learning algorithm with an 
asymmetric loss structure favoring false positives over false negatives and use corroboration to further eliminate false positives.  

                                                              Figure 8, Hypercube containing all positives plus 10% margin. Positives are blue. 
References: 
[1]  "Activating Mutations in the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Underlying Responsiveness of Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer to Gefitinib", T. J. Lynch et al., N. 
Engl. J. Med. 350, 2129 (2004). 
[2]  Nakao, K., Mehta, K.R., Fridlyand, J., Moore, D.H., Jain, A.N., Lafuente, A., 
Wiencke, J.W., Terdiman, J.P. and Waldman, F.M. (2004) High-resolution analysis 
of DNA copy number alterations in colorectal cancer by array-based comparative 
genomic hybridization, Carcinogenesis, 25, 1345-1357. 
[3]  http://www.softgenetics.com/ms/index.htm 
[4]  http://www.phrap.com/phred/ 
[5]  Therneau TM, Atkinson EJ: An introduction to recursive partitioning using the RPART routines. 
Tech Rep Mayo Foundation 1997. p 13. 
[6] Chih-Chung Chang and Chih-Jen Lin, LIBSVM : a library for support vector machines, 2001. Software available at http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/~cjlin/libsvm 

 

